1|1-7|1:1 In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. # 1:2 Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, # 1:3 The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, # 1:4 Master of the Day of Judgement. # 1:5 You [alone] we worship, and You [alone] we ask for help; # 1:6 Guide us to the straight path, # 1:7 The path of those whom You have blessed; not of those who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who have gone astray. # *In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful*, that is, I begin with every name of Allah (Subhanahu wa Ta‘ala - Glorified and Exalted is He); this includes all the (beautiful) names of Allah. # *Allah* - He is the One Who is worshipped, the only One Who deserves to be worshipped, because of the divine attributes He has, which are attributes of perfection. # *The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful * These two names indicate that He possesses great mercy that encompasses all things and includes all living beings, and He has decreed it for the pious, the followers of His Prophets and Messengers. Absolute mercy is for them; others have a share of it. It should be noted that one of the basic principles on which the early generations of the Ummah and its leading scholars are agreed is belief in the names and attributes of Allah and how those attributes are manifested. For example, they believe that He is Most Gracious, Most Merciful; He possesses mercy that is one of His attributes and this mercy has an impact on His creation. So all types of blessings are signs of His mercy. The same applies to all of His names. We may say concerning the All-Knowing that He has (unlimited) knowledge, by means of which He knows all things. Similarly, the All-Powerful is possessed of might and has power over all things. #*Praise be to Allah*. This refers to praising Allah for the attributes of perfection and for His actions that are based on generosity and justice. So to Him be perfect praise in all ways. *the Lord of the worlds* The Lord is the One Who sustains all creatures - which refers to all beings other than Allah - because He created them, granted them everything that they need and bestowed great blessings upon them; if they were deprived of those blessings they would not be able to survive, for whatever blessings they enjoy come from Him. He sustains His creation in two ways, general and specific. In general terms, this refers to His creation of all creatures, His granting of provision to them and His guiding them to that which is in their best interests, which enables them to survive in this world. In specific terms, it refers to His cherishing of His close friends, by means of instilling faith in their hearts, guiding them to it, perfecting it for them and warding off from them distractions and obstacles that come between them and faith. In real terms, this means guiding them to everything that is good and protecting them from everything that is bad. Perhaps it is for this reason that most of the supplications of the Prophets used the word Lord (Rabb), since all their requests and needs came under His special cherishing. The phrase 'the Lord of the worlds' indicates that He alone has the power to create, and He alone controls His creation, bestows blessings and is completely independent of means, whilst all of creation is dependent upon Him in all respects. # *Master of the Day of Judgement*. The Master (Malik) is the one who possesses the attributes of sovereignty, one of the implications of which is that He enjoins and forbids, rewards and punishes, and controls His subjects in all ways. This sovereignty is connected to the Day of Judgement, which is the Day of Resurrection, the day on which people will be judged on the basis of their deeds, both good and bad. On that day, His perfect sovereignty, justice and wisdom will become completely clear to His creation, and they will realise that created beings have no sovereignty at all. On that day, kings and subjects, slaves and free, will all be equal and will submit fully to His might, awaiting the reckoning, hoping for His reward and fearing His punishment. Hence this day is singled out for mention; otherwise, He is the Master of the Day of Judgement and of all other days. # *You [alone] we worship, and You [alone] we ask for help*, that is, we single out You alone to worship and ask for help. Putting the object at the beginning of the sentence conveys the meaning of exclusivity. In other words: we worship You, and we do not worship anyone other than You; we ask You for help and we do not ask anyone other than You for help. Worship is mentioned before seeking help by way of mentioning what is general before what is specific, and also to give precedence to Allah’s dues over those of His slaves. “Worship” (‘ibadah) refers to everything that Allah loves and is pleased with of actions and words, both outward and inward. “Seeking help” refers to relying upon Allah when seeking to attain what is beneficial and ward off what is harmful, whilst trusting that one will attain that. Worshipping Allah and seeking His help is the means of attaining eternal happiness and salvation from all evils; there is no other way of attaining salvation apart from doing these two things. True worship can only be that which is learned from the Messenger of Allah (salla Allahu ‘alayhi wa sallam - blessings and peace be upon him) and done with the intention of seeking the pleasure of Allah. If it includes these two things, then it is worship. Seeking help is mentioned after worship, even though it is a part of worship, because in offering alltypes of worship the individual needs the help of Allah; if Allah does not help him, he will not attain what he wants to of fulfilling commands and heeding prohibitions. # *Guide us to the straight path*, that is, show us and help us to follow the straight path, which is the clear path that leads to Allah and to His paradise, which in turn means knowing the truth and acting upon it. (This is a prayer) for guidance to the straight path and guidance when following the path. Guidance to the straight path means adhering to the religion of Islam and forsaking all other religions; guidance when following the path includes guidance concerning all the details of religion, in knowledge and action. This supplication is one of the most concise, comprehensive and beneficial of supplications. Hence it is obligatory to call upon Allah with it in every rak'ah of the prayer, because we are in need of that. # This straight path is *The path of those whom You have blessed*, namely the Prophets, siddiqin (strong and true in faith), martyrs and righteous people. Not the path of those who have incurred Your wrath, those who came to know the truth but drifted away from it, such as the Jews and others like them; and not the path of those who have gone astray, those who drifted away from the truth because of ignorance and misguidance, such as the Christians and others like them. # Although this soorah is brief, it contains that which no other soorah of the Qur’an contains. It refers to the three types of tawheed (affirmation of the oneness of Allah). Tawheed ar-ruboobiyah (affirmation of the oneness of the divine Lordship) is seen in the verse the Lord of the worlds. Tawheed al-uloohiyah (affirmation of the oneness of divinity), which refers to worshipping Allah alone, is seen in the phrases *Praise be to Allah* and *You [alone] we worship*. Tawheed al-asma’ was-sifat (affirmation of the oneness of the divine names and attributes), which means affirming that the attributes of perfection belong to Allah alone, which He ascribed to Himself and which His Messenger affirmed, without denying the apparent meanings or likening Him to His creation, is seen in the word Praise, as discussed above. It affirms prophethood in the words Guide us to the straight path, because that guidance is not possible without sending Messengers. It affirms recompense for deeds in the words *Master of the Day of Judgement*, and tells us that the recompense will be on the basis of justice, because this is the meaning of the word judgement. It affirms the divine decree, and tells us that humans act on the basis of free w ill, which is contrary to the view s of the Qadaris and Jabaris In fact, it refutes all the followers of innovation [and misguidance] in the verse Guide us to the straight path because the straight path is knowing the truth and acting upon it, but everyone who follows innovation [and misguidance] does the opposite of that.
2|1-5|2:1 Alif. Lam. Meem # 2:2 This is the Book about which there is no doubt; in it is guidance for those who fear Allah, # 2:3 Who believe in the unseen, establish prayer, and spend out of what We have provided for them; # 2:4 And who believe in the Revelation sent down to you, and in what was sent before your time, and believe with certainty in the hereafter. # 2:5 It is they who are following guidance from their Lord and it is they who will prosper. # We have discussed the basmalah (the phrase bismillah ir-Rahman ir-Raheem) above. With regard to the letters that appear at the beginning of some soorahs, the most prudent approach is to refrain from discussing their meaning, without basing that on any shar'i (of or pertaining to Sharia; Islamic) text, whilst being certain that Allah ) did not reveal them in vain; rather there is wisdom behind that, of which we are not aware. # *This is the Book*, that is, this great Book is the Book in a true sense; it contains that which the previous Books did not contain of great knowledge and clear truth. So *there is no doubt* about it in any way, shape or form. Stating that there is no doubt implies the opposite; the opposite of doubt is certainty, so this Book contains certain knowledge that dispels doubt. This is a useful principle to note, that when it is stated that something is not the case, that inevitably refers to the opposite. # As it is based on certainty, and guidance cannot be attained except on the basis of certainty, Allah says: *in it is guidance for those who fear Allah*. Guidance is the means of being directed away from misguidance and doubt, and it is the means of following the proper ways. Guidance is mentioned, but to what is not mentioned; Allah did not say guidance towards achieving such and such a purpose or to such and such a thing, because He intended it to be general in meaning. It is guidance to that which is in people’s best interests in both realms (this world and the hereafter). So it is guidance for people in all matters, both fundamental and minor. It differentiates true from false, sound from flawed, and it explains to them how to follow the paths that will benefit them in this world and in the hereafter. # Allah says elsewhere: *as guidance for humankind* (see 2:185) - which is general in meaning, but here and elsewhere He says *guidance for those who fear Allah* because it is, in and of itself, guidance for all people, but those who are doomed do not pay heed and they do not accept the guidance of Allah. Thus proof is established against them and they do not benefit from it because they are doomed. But the pious are those who have attained the main cause of achieving guidance, namely taqwa (piety or fear of Allah), the true meaning of which is taking measures to protect themselves from the wrath and punishment of Allah by obeying His commands and heeding His prohibitions. So they are guided by it and they benefit from it in the fullest sense. Allah says: *O you who believe. If you fear Allah, He will give you the insight to distinguish between right and wrong...*(8:29). # So the pious are the ones who benefit from the verses (ayat, lit. signs) of the Qur’an and the signs in creation. # Guidance is of two types: guidance in the sense of being aware of the message, and guidance in the sense of being helped to follow the message. The pious have been granted both types of guidance, whereas others have not been helped to follow the message. Being aware of the message without being helped to act upon it is not guidance in any real or complete sense. # Then Allah describes the pious in terms of both inward and outward deeds, because piety (taqwa) includes both. He says: *Who believe in the unseen*. The true meaning of belief or faith is complete affirmation of what the Messengers taught; this also includes physical actions. It does not refer to believing in things that are visible or may be known through any of the physical senses, because in that regard there is no difference between the Muslim and the disbeliever. Rather the issue here is belief in the unseen, which we cannot see or know through any of the physical senses; rather we believe in it because Allah and His Messenger have told us of it. This faith is what distinguishes the Muslim from the disbeliever, because it is believing and affirming, with no hesitation, what Allah and His Messenger said. So the believer believes everything that Allah or His Messenger have told him, whether he sees it or not and whether he understands it and comprehends it or not, unlike the heretics and those who disbelieve in the unseen, because their limited intellects could not grasp it, so they rejected what they could not comprehend. Thus their intellect was corrupted and their thinking was flawed, whilst the thinking of the believers, who were guided by Allah, was sound. # Belief in the unseen includes belief in everything that Allah and His Messengers have told us about unseen matters in the past and in the future, events of the hereafter and the reality of the divine attributes and their essence. So they believe in the attributes of Allah in a true sense and with certain faith, even if they do not understand their essence. # Then Allah says: *establish prayer*. He did not say that they “do” the prayer or “perform” the prayer, because it is not sufficient to only do the outward motions. Establishing prayer means establishing its outward form completely, with all its essential and obligatory parts and fulfilling its conditions, as well as establishing it inwardly, paying attention to its essence, which means having presence of mind whilst praying, and pondering the meaning of what one is saying and doing. Such is the prayer of which Allah says: *...for verily prayer keeps [one] away from obscenity and wickedness...* (al-‘Ankabutt 29: 45) - and this is the prayer that brings reward. The individual will be rewarded for his prayer only inasmuch he offered it with presence of mind. This applies to both obligatory and supererogatory prayers. # *and spend out of what We have provided for them*. This includes both obligatory spending, such as zakah and spending on one’s wives, relatives, slaves and so on, and spending on all kinds of charitable causes, which is encouraged in Islam (mustahabb). The recipients of this spending are not mentioned, because there are so many different ways of spending and because spending in and of itself is a means of drawing close to Allah. The word min (translated here as *out of*) refers to some of the wealth; this draws attention to the fact that all that is expected of them is to give a small portion of their wealth, in such a way that does not harm them and is not burdensome; in fact they themselves benefit from spending and their brothers will also benefit. # *what We have provided for them*. This indicates that this wealth that you possess was not obtained by your strength and efforts; rather it is provision that Allah has bestowed upon you and blessed you with. Therefore, as He has blessed you and favoured you above many of His slaves, you should show gratitude to Him by giving some of that with which He has blessed you, thus helping (literally, consoling) your brothers who are destitute. # Allah often mentions prayer and zakah together in the Qur’an, because prayer is a reflection of sincerity towards Allah, and zakah and spending are a reflection of kindness towards His slaves. The sign of a person’s being blessed (destined for paradise) is his sincerity towards Allah and his striving to help and benefit people, just as the sign of a person’s being doomed (destined for hell) is that he does not have these two characteristics, sincerity and kindness. # *And who believe in the Revelation sent down to you*, namely the Qur’an and Sunnah. Allah says: *...For Allah has sent down to you the Book and wisdom...* (an-Nisa’ 4:113). # So the pious believe in everything that the Messenger brought, and they do not differentiate between what he brought, believing in some parts and not believing in others, either by rejecting them or interpreting them in a manner other than that which was intended, as some of the innovators do, who misinterpret the texts that point to something other than what they say, which results in them not believing in the correct meaning, even if they believe the wording. Therefore they do not believe in them in a true sense. # *and in what was sent before your time*. This includes belief in all the previous Books; belief in the Books implies belief in the Messengers and everything that the Books contain, especially the Torah, Gospel and Psalms. This is something unique to the believers, that they believe in all the divinely revealed Books and in all the Messengers, and they do not differentiate between any of them. # *and believe with certainty in the hereafter*. The hereafter is that which comes after death; it is singled out for mention after discussing beliefs in general terms, because belief in the Last Day is one of the pillars of faith, and because it gives one the strongest motive to hope for reward, fear punishment and strive hard. Certainty is perfect knowledge that leaves no room for doubt at all and should prompt one to strive hard and do righteous deeds. # *It is they* that is, those who have these praiseworthy characteristics *who are following guidance from their Lord*. The word guidance (huda) appears in the indefinite form, which in Arabic is an indication of how great it is; what guidance can be greater than the characteristics mentioned above, of having sound belief and righteous deeds? True guidance cannot be anything but the guidance followed by these people; anything that is contrary to that is misguidance. # The preposition (in the phrase translated here as *It is they who are following guidance*, lit. “on guidance”) is indicative of superiority. A different preposition is used when referring to misguidance, as in the verse: *...and verily either we or you are rightly guided or clearly misguided.* (Saba'34: 24) - because the one who is guided is elevated to a superior position by means of that guidance, whereas the one who is misguided is sinking in it and is despised as a result. # *it is they who will prosper*. Prosperity means achieving what you are seeking and being saved from what you fear. Prosperity is exclusive to them, because there is no way of attaining prosperity except by following their path. Any paths other than that are paths that lead to doom, loss and destruction.
2|6-7|2:6 As for those who disbelieve, it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them; they will not believe. #2:7 Allah has placed a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and over their eyes is a cover; theirs will be a severe penalty. # Therefore, when Allah mentions the characteristics of the true believers, He also mentions the characteristics of the disbelievers, who openly show their disbelief, stubbornly opposing the Messenger: * As for those who disbelieve, it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them; they will not believe. Allah has placed a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and over their eyes is a cover; theirs will be a severe penalty.* (2:6-7). Here Allah tells us concerning those who disbelieve - that is, those who have the characteristics of disbelief, which has become a definitive part of their identity - that nothing can deter them from their disbelief and no exhortation can make them give it up. They will persist in their disbelief, so it is all the same to them whether you warn them or not, for they will not believe. The essence of disbelief is rejection or partial rejection of that which the Messenger brought. These disbelievers do not benefit from the call (to Islam); it is only given in order to establish proof against them. It is as if this was intended to put an end to hope on the part of the Messenger that they might believe: do not grieve over them (cf. 5:26) and do not destroy yourself with grief for them (cf. 35: 8). # Then mention is made of the impediments that prevent them from believing: *Allah has placed a seal on their hearts and on their hearing* that is, He has sealed them up so that faith will not enter them or penetrate them, and thus they will not understand or hear that which might benefit them. *and over their eyes is a covert*, that is, a cover that prevents them from seeing that which might benefit them. Thus the means of attaining knowledge and goodness are blocked for them, so there is no hope for them and no goodness is to be expected of them. Rather that has been withheld from them and the door to faith is closed for them because of their disbelief, rejection and stubbornness after the truth became clear to them, as Allah says: *We will turn their hearts and eyes away [from the truth], since they refused to believe in it the first time...* (al-An‘am 6:110). This is an immediate punishment (in this world). Then Allah mentions the punishment in the hereafter: *theirs will be a severe penalty* namely the punishment of hellfire and the eternal, everlasting wrath of the Compeller (al-Jabbar).
2|8-10|2:8 Among people there are some who say: We believe in Allah and the Last Day, but in fact they are not believers. # 2:9 They seek to deceive Allah and those who believe, but they are not deceiving anyone except themselves, although they do not realise. # 2:10 In their hearts is a disease; and Allah has increased their disease. Theirs will be a painful penalty for their persistent lying. # Then He describes the hypocrites who make an outward display of being Muslim whilst concealing disbelief in their hearts: *Among people there are some who say: We believe in Allah and the Last Day, but in fact they are not believers. They seek to deceive Allah and those who believe, but they are not deceiving anyone except themselves, although they do not realise. In their hearts is a disease; and Allah has increased their disease. Theirs will be a painful penalty for their persistent lying.* (2:8-10). # Hypocrisy means outwardly pretending to be good whilst concealing evil. This definition includes both hypocrisy in beliefs and hypocrisy in actions. The Prophet ﷺ mentioned something similar when he said: *The signs of the hypocrite are three: when he speaks he lies, when he makes a promise he breaks it, and when he is entrusted with something he betrays that trust.* (Bukhari and Muslim). Another report adds: *When he disputes, he resorts to foul speech.* (Bukhari and Muslim). *We will turn their hearts and eyes away [from the truth], since they refused to believe in it the first time...* (al-An‘am 6:110). # The kind of hypocrisy in belief that puts one beyond the pale of Islam is that which Allah ascribed to the hypocrites in this soorah and elsewhere. Hypocrisy did not exist before the migration of the Messenger from Makkah to Madinah; after he migrated, in the battle of Badr Allah caused the believers to prevail and made them victorious, and those people in Madinah who had not become Muslim were humiliated. For that reason, some of them pretended to become Muslim, out of fear and by way of deceit, in order to protect themselves and their wealth. So they lived among the Muslims, pretending to be of their number, when in reality they were not Muslims. # By His kindness towards the believers, Allah described the characteristics (of the hypocrites) by which they might be recognised, so that the believers would not be deceived by them and so that (the hypocrites themselves) might be discouraged from committing many of their evil actions. Allah said: *The hypocrites are afraid lest a soorah be sent down concerning them...* (at-Tawbah 9: 64). (In this passage), Allah described them in terms of the essence of hypocrisy: *Among people there are some who say: We believe in Allah and the Last Day - but in fact they are not believers*. They paid lip service to that which was not in their hearts, so Allah showed them to be liars by saying *but in fact they are not believers*, because true faith is that which is confirmed in the heart and on the lips. Theirs was an attempt to deceive Allah and His believing slaves. # Deceit means pretending one thing whilst concealing something else so that the deceiver may get what he wants from the one whom he is deceiving. These hypocrites were behaving in this manner with Allah and His slaves, but their deceit backfired on them. This is a kind of miracle or wonder, because the deceiver usually either gets what he wants or he remains safe without gaining or losing anything. But in this case, the deceit of the hypocrites backfired on them. It was as if they did what they did of plotting and scheming in order to harm and doom themselves, because Allah is not harmed by their deceit at all, and neither are His believing slaves. The believers are not harmed if the hypocrites pretend to believe in order to protect their wealth and lives, because their plotting will eventually backfire on them, which will result in disgrace and scandal in this world, as well as ongoing regret because of what the believers achieve of power and victory. Then in the hereafter, they will have a painful and devastating punishment because of their lies, disbelief and evil doing. But in their ignorance and foolishness they do not realise that. #*In their hearts is a disease*. What is meant by disease here is the disease of doubt, confusion and hypocrisy. The heart is vulnerable to two (spiritual) diseases that make it unhealthy and unbalanced: the disease of false doubts and the disease of desires that may lead to destruction. Disbelief, hypocrisy, doubt and innovation are all (spiritual) diseases that result from doubts and confusion. Zina (illicit sexual activity) and the inclination towards immoral actions and sin result from the disease of desires, as Allah says: *...lest one in whose heart is a disease should be moved with desire...* (al-Ahzab 33: 32) - this has to do with the desire for zina (fornication or adultery). The one who is truly safe is the one who is protected from these two diseases, for he will have certainty and faith, and will be patient in refraining from all sins; thus he will enjoy good spiritual health. # *In their hearts is a disease; and Allah has increased their disease*. This verse, which speaks of the hypocrites, highlights Allah’s wisdom in decreeing sin for the sinners: because of their previous sins, He causes them to commit further sins that will incur His punishment, as He says elsewhere: *We will turn their hearts and eyes away [from the truth], since they refused to believe in it the first time...* (al-Anam 6: 110) , *...So when they chose to deviate [from the truth], Allah caused their hearts to deviate [from right guidance]...* (as-Saff 61: 5), *As for those in whose hearts is a disease, it will add doubt to their doubt...* (at-Tawbah 9: 125). So the punishment for sin is more sin, just as the reward for good deeds is more good deeds. Allah says: *Allah increases in guidance those who are guided...* (Maryam 19: 76). 
2|11-12|2:11 When it is said to them: Do not make mischief in the land, they say: We only want to put things right. # 2:12 Indeed they are the ones who make mischief, but they do not realise. # When these hypocrites are told not to make mischief in the land, which means committing sins and deeds based on disbelief, including disclosing the secrets of the believers to their enemies and taking the disbelievers as close friends, *they say: We only want to put things right*. Thus they both strive to cause mischief in the land and defend their actions as being an effort to put things straight rather than causing m isch ief- contrary to what is really happening, and combining wrongdoing with the belief that it is right. This is a greater offence than committing sin whilst believing that it is indeed a sin; the one who does that is better off and there is more hope that he will return to the right path. # Because their saying *We only want to put things right* would seem to imply that they are the only ones who are putting things right, which in turn would imply that the believers are not putting things right, Allah refuted their claims by saying: *Indeed they are the ones who make mischief*. There is no greater m ischief than that of those who disbelieve in the signs of Allah, bar people from following the path of Allah, try to deceive Allah and His close friends and take as allies those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger, yet still claim that they are putting things right. Can there be any mischief greater than this? But they do not know anything that will benefit them, even though the knowledge that they have is sufficient to establish proof against them. Committing sin is only regarded as mischief because it results in damage to whatever is on the face of the earth of grains, fruits, trees and plants, as a result of the blights that befall them because of sin, and because putting things right on earth is achieved when people obey Allah and believe in Him. # It is for this purpose that Allah created humanity and caused them to dwell on earth, and He bestowed provisions upon them to help them to obey and worship Him. If they do the opposite of that on earth, then they are spreading corruption which causes ruin by using what is on earth in a way other than that for which it was created. 
2|13|2:13 When it is said to them: Believe as the people believe, they say: Shall we believe as the fools believe? Indeed it is they who are the fools, but they do not know. # That is, when it is said to the hypocrites: Believe as the people believe; this refers to the Companions (radiya Allahu 'anhum - may Allah be pleased with all of them), whose faith was affirmed in their hearts and on their lips. But the hypocrites said, on the basis of their false accusation: Shall we believe as the fools believe? They were referring to the Companions thinking that it was their alleged foolishness that had led them to believe and to leave their homelands and oppose the disbelievers. In their (the hypocrites’) view, wisdom dictated the opposite of that. So they described them as foolish, im plying that they them selves were people of wisdom and understanding. # But Allah refuted their argument and stated that in reality they were the fools, because real foolishness is for a person to ignore what is in his best interests and strive for that which w ill harm him, and this description was true in their case. On the other hand, wisdom and reason are reflected in a person’s knowing what is in his best interests and striving for that which w ill benefit him and ward off harm from him, which was true in the case of the Companions and the believers. What matters is sound proof, not mere claims and empty words. 
2|14-16|2:14 When they meet those who believe, they say: We believe; but when they are alone with their devils, they say: We are really with you; we were only mocking. # 2:15 Allah is mocking them, and gives them free rein in transgression so that they wander blindly. # 2:16 These are the ones who have traded guidance for error, but their trade brings no profit and they are not guided. # This refers to them saying verbally that which was not in their hearts. When they met the believers, they would pretend that they were follow ing their path and that they were with them, but when they were alone with their devils - that is, their leaders in evil - they said: We are really with you; w e were only m ocking the believers by pretending to them that w e are follow ing their path. This is how they are inwardly and outwardly, but the plotting of evil only rebounds on those who plot (cf 35: 43). # *Allah is mocking them, and gives them free rein in transgression so that they wander blindly*. This is their punishment for mocking His slaves. By way of mocking them, Allah makes attractive to them the miserable situation in which they are and the evil way they are following, to the point that they think that they are with the believers, because Allah did not give the believers power over them. And He will mock them on the Day of Resurrection by giving them visible light along with the believers, then when the believers begin to walk in their light, the light of the hypocrites will be extinguished and they will be left in confusion after the light has gone. How great will be their despair after their hopes had been raised. *The hypocrites will call out to the believers: Were we not with you? They will say: Yes, but you gave in to confusion and temptation, you kept waiting [for some misfortune to befall us], you doubted...* (al-Hadid 57:14) *and gives them free rein* that is, He lets them get carried away *in transgression* that is, in their evildoing and disbelief *so that they wander blindly* that is, confused and hesitant. This is how Allah mocks them. Then Allah describes how they really are: *These are the ones who have traded guidance for error, but their trade brings no profit and they are not guided.* (2:6). #These people, namely the hypocrites who have the characteristics described here, *are the ones who have traded guidance for error* that is, they preferred misguidance, like a buyer who wants a particular item and because of his desire for it, he is willing to pay a high price. This is one of the best likenesses that explain how they are, because it likens misguidance, which is the ultimate evil, to an item for purchase, and it likens guidance, which is the ultimate good, to the price. So they gave away guidance and had no interest in it, in return for misguidance because they wanted it. This is their trade, and what a bad deal it is. #If the one who trades a dinar (gold coin) for a dirham (silver coin) is a loser, then how about the one who trades a precious stone for a dirham? How about the one who trades guidance for misguidance, chooses doom over blessing, and prefers the most vile and base of things to the most sublime? His trade brings no profit; rather it incurs the greatest loss. # *...Say: Indeed, the real losers will be those who lose their own souls and their families on the Day of Resurrection. That is indeed manifest loss.* (az-Zumar 39:15). *and they are not guided* this confirms that they are misguided, and that they did not gain anything from guidance. These are their abhorrent characteristics. # Then a likeness is given that highlights their character in a very clear manner: * Their likeness is that of a man who kindled a fire; when it illuminated all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness, unable to see. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return [to the right path], Or [another likeness] is that of a heavy downpour from the sky, accompanied by darkness, thunder and lightning. They put their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunder-clap, for fear of death. But Allah encompasses the disbelievers. The lightning almost snatches away their sight; every time it flashes, they walk [a few steps] therein, but when the darkness overtakes them again, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could take away their hearing and their sight; for Allah has power over all things.* (al-Baqarah 2:17-20). 
2|17-20|2:17 Their likeness is that of a man who kindled a fire; when it illuminated all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness, unable to see. #2:18 Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return [to the right path], #2:19 Or [another likeness] is that of a heavy downpour from the sky, accompanied by darkness, thunder and lightning. They put their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunder-clap, for fear of death. But Allah encompasses the disbelievers. #2:20 The lightning almost snatches away their sight; every time it flashes, they walk [a few steps] therein, but when the darkness overtakes them again, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could take away their hearing and their sight; for Allah has power over all things. # Then a likeness is given that highlights their character in a very clear manner: * Their likeness is that of a man who kindled a fire; when it illuminated all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness, unable to see. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return [to the right path], Or [another likeness] is that of a heavy downpour from the sky, accompanied by darkness, thunder and lightning. They put their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunder-clap, for fear of death. But Allah encompasses the disbelievers. The lightning almost snatches away their sight; every time it flashes, they walk [a few steps] therein, but when the darkness overtakes them again, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could take away their hearing and their sight; for Allah has power over all things.* (al-Baqarah 2:17-20). # The exact likeness that describes the situation they are in is that of a man who kindled fire; when it was very dark and his need for a fire was great, he lit it from someone else’s fire, as he had no fire of his own and needed to bring it from someone else. Then when the fire illuminated the area around him and he could see his surroundings and any potential dangers, and thus he felt safe and benefitted from the fire and was pleased with it, thinking that he was in control of it - whilst he was like that, Allah took away its light, so that he lost the light and any pleasure that he had felt because of it, and he remained in deep darkness with the fire still burning, as its illumination has disappeared but its burning effect still remained. Thus he was left in many layers of darkness: the darkness of the night, the darkness of the cloud, the darkness of the rain and the darkness that comes after the light disappears. How will the one who is in such a situation be? That is how these hypocrites are. They took the fire of faith from the believers, but having faith was not characteristic of them; rather they took the fire of faith in order to protect their lives and keep their wealth safe, so they had a kind of security in this world. Then whilst they were like that, death came to them and took away the benefit of that light, and there befell them all kinds of distress, grief and torment, as well as the darkness of disbelief, the darkness of hypocrisy and the darkness of various kinds of sin. After that came the darkness of hellfire - an evil place to settle in (cf. 14: 29). # Hence Allah says concerning them: *Deaf* that is, unable to hear the truth. *dumb* that is, unable to speak the truth. *blind* that is, unable to see the truth. *they will not return [to the right path]* because they have forsaken the truth after having come to know it, so they will not return to it, unlike those who kept away from the truth as the result of ignorance and misguidance; they did not understand it and they are more likely to come back to it than the hypocrites. *Or [another likeness] is that of a heavy downpour from the sky* that is, they are like one who is caught in a heavy downpour from the sky, which is rain that comes down in copious amounts, *accompanied by darkness* namely the darkness of the night, the darkness of the cloud and the darkness of the rain *thunder* which is the sound that is heard from the cloud *and lightning* which is the flashing light that is seen with the cloud. *every time it flashes* that is, every time the lightning flashes in that darkness *they walk [a few steps] therein, but when the darkness overtakes them again, they stand still* that is, they halt. # This is the situation of the hypocrites. When they hear the Qur’an and its commands and prohibitions, promises and warnings, they put their fingers in their ears and turn away from its commands and prohibitions, promises and warnings. They are terrified of its warnings and disturbed by its promises (to the believers). Hence they turn away as much as they can and they hate it as the one who is caught in a downpour hates it, and when he hears the thunder he puts his fingers in his ears, for fear of death. In the case of the one who is caught in a downpour, that could help him to be safe, but in the case of the hypocrites, how could they become safe at the time when Allah encompasses them by His power and knowledge, so they cannot escape from Him or frustrate Him; rather He records their deeds and will requite them in full. # As they are suffering from deafness, dumbness and blindness in a metaphorical sense, and they are barred from the paths to faith, Allah says: *And if Allah willed, He could take away their hearing and their sight* that is, in a physical sense. This is a warning to them aimed at making them afraid of punishment in this world, so that they will adopt caution and be deterred from some of their evil and hypocrisy, *for Allah has power over all things*, hence nothing is beyond Him; by His power, if He wills something He does it, and no one can prevent Him or oppose Him. # In this verse and others like it we see a refutation of the Qadaris who say that their deeds are not subject to the power and control of Allah, as this verse shows that their deeds are among the things that are included in the words *for Allah has power over all things*. 
2|21-22|2:21 O people! Worship your Lord, Who created you and those who came before you, that you may become pious; # 2:22 Who has made the earth a resting-place for you, and the heavens an edifice; and sent down rain from the heavens; and brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for you; so do not set up rivals to Allah when you know better. # This is a general command that is addressed to all people, instructing them to worship Him in a comprehensive way by obeying the commands of Allah, heeding His prohibitions and believing in His words. Thus He commands them to do that for which He created them, as He says: *I have not created the jinn and humans except to worship Me.* (adh-Dhariyat 51:56). #Then Allah tells us why it is obligatory to worship Him alone, for He is your Lord Who has bestowed upon you all kinds of blessings: He created you after you were nothing, He created those who came before you and He bestowed upon you blessings both obvious and hidden. He made the earth a resting-place for you, on which you build structures for your benefit; He caused you to cultivate it and till it; He enabled you to travel from one place to another; and He granted you many ways of benefitting from it. He made the heavens an edifice for the earth on which you dwell, and He placed in it benefits that you need, such as the sun, moon and stars. # *and sent down rain from the heavens*. The word sama’ (translated here as *heavens*) refers to anything that is above you. Hence the commentators said that what is meant by *heavens* (sama’) here is the clouds, from which Allah sends down rain. *and brought forth therewith fruits* this may include other crops such as grains, dates and so on. *as a provision for you*, to feed and sustain you so that you might survive by means of it and enjoy it. #*so do not set up rivals to Allah*, that is, equals from among His creation which you worship as you should worship Allah and love as you should love Allah, although they are created beings like you who receive provision and are under His control, having not the slightest power either in heaven or on earth, and they cannot benefit or harm you at all. # *when you know better*, that is, when you know that Allah has no partner or equal with regard to the power of creation, granting of provision or control of the universe, and He has no partner in worship. So how can you worship other gods besides Him when you know these things? This is something that is very strange and extremely foolish. # This verse combines the command to worship Allah alone and the prohibition on worshipping anything other than Him. It offers clear evidence that it is obligatory to worship Him and that the worship of anything other than Him is invalid. This refers to tawheed ar-ruboobiyah (oneness of the divine Lordship), which implies that He is the only One Who creates, grants provision and controls. If anyone accepts that He has no partner in these things, then by the same token he should also accept that Allah has no partner in worship. This is the clearest rational evidence for the oneness of the Creator and the invalidity of associating partners with Him. # The words *that you may become pious* may be understood as meaning that if you worship Allah alone, then you will avoid His wrath and punishment, because you have taken measures to ward that off from yourselves. Or it may mean that if you worship Allah (alone), you will become one of the pious who are described as fearing Allah. Both meanings are sound and complement one another. The one who worships Allah properly is one of the pious, and whoever is pious will be saved from the wrath and punishment of Allah.
2|23-24|2:23 And if you are in doubt concerning what We have revealed to Our slave, then produce a soorah like it; and call your helpers besides Allah, if you are truthful [in your claim]. # 2:24 But if you cannot do it, and you can never do it, then beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones, which is prepared for the disbelievers. # These verses provide rational evidence that the Messenger of Allah was genuine and that his message was true. # *And if you are in doubt...* This is addressed to those who opposed the Messenger and rejected his message, saying that he was lying. (What is meant is:) if you are doubtful and are uncertain concerning what We have sent down to Our slave, as to whether it is true or not, then here is a fair argument which will decide the matter between you and him. That argument is that he is a human being like you; he is not the most eloquent or most knowledgeable among you. You have known him from when he was small, as he grew up among you. He does not read or write, yet he has brought you a Book that he says is from Allah, but you say that he is speaking of his own accord and has made it up. If the matter is as you say, then produce a soorah like it, with the help of any one you can find among your helpers and witnesses; this will be something easy for you, especially since you are people of eloquence and oratory, and you are fuelled by deep enmity towards the Messenger. If you can produce a soorah like it, then he is as you say, but if you cannot produce a soorah like it, and you fail utterly, (rest assured that) you will never be able to produce a soorah like it. However, this (challenge) is offered by way of showing fairness and going along with you. This is a great sign and clear evidence that he is telling the truth and that his message is true. Then (if you fail to meet the challenge) it will be obligatory for you to follow him and protect yourselves from hellfire which reached the ultimate heat because its fuel is people and stones; it is not like the fire of this world that is fuelled with wood. The fire of hell is prepared for those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger, so beware of disbelieving in his Messenger after it has become clear to you that he is indeed the Messenger of Allah. # This and similar verses are called the verses of challenge; they prove that people are incapable of producing anything like this Qur’an. Allah says: *Say: Verily, if all of humankind and the jinn were to come together to produce the like of this Qur’an, they could never produce the like thereof, even if they helped one another.* (al-lsra 17:88). # How can the words of one who is created from dust be like the words of the Lord of lords? How can one who is lacking in all aspects produce words like the words of the Most Perfect, Whose perfection is absolute and Who is completely independent of means? This is not possible and it is not within any human’s capability. Anyone who has the slightest knowledge and appreciation of (Arabic) literary and oratory style will, if he compares the Qur’an with other eloquent speech, clearly see a great difference between them. #*And if you are in doubt...* This verse indicates that the one for whom there is hope of guidance away from misguidance is the one who has doubts and is confused, who cannot tell truth from falsehood. When the truth becomes clear to such a one, he is more likely to be guided if he is sincere in seeking the truth. As for the stubborn one who recognises the truth but ignores it, he cannot come back because he has turned away from the truth after it became clear to him and he did not turn away from it out of ignorance, so he is a hopeless case. By the same token, the doubter who is not sincere or serious in seeking the truth and turns away indifferently will usually not be guided. # Describing the Messenger as being a slave in the context of discussing such an important matter is indicative of his greatest characteristic, which is being a true slave of Allah, doing his duty towards Him in a manner unmatched by anyone else before or since. He is also described as being a slave in the context of the isra’ (Prophet’s Night Journey), as Allah says: *Glory be to Him Who took His slave for a journey by night...* (al-Isra’ 17:1) - and in the context of sending down Revelation, as He says: *Blessed be He Who sent down the criterion [between right and wrong, namely the Qur’an] to His slave, so that it may be a warning to the worlds.* (al-Furqan 25:1). # *which is prepared for the disbelievers* this and similar verses support the view of ahl as-Sunnah wal-jama'ah, which is that paradise and hell are two created entities; this is unlike the view of the Mutazilites. It also tells us that the monotheists, even if they commit some sins, will not remain in hell forever, because Allah says that it is *prepared for the disbelievers*. If the sinners among the monotheists were to remain therein forever, it would not say that it is prepared for the disbelievers alone. This is unlike the view of the Kharijites and Mutazilites. It also indicates that punishment becomes due for reasons, namely disbelief and various kinds of sin. 
2|25|2:25 And give glad tidings to those who believe and do righteous deeds, that they will have gardens, through which rivers flow. Every time they are provided with fruits therefrom, they will say: This is what we were provided with before, because they will be given things that resemble one another; and they will have therein pure spouses; and they will abide therein forever. # As Allah mentioned the requital of the disbelievers, here He mentions the reward of the believers, those who do righteous deeds. This is the style of the Qur’an, which combines encouragement with deterrent so that the individual will be motivated and deterred at the same time, and he will balance fear with hope. # *And give glad tidings* that is, O Messenger and those who convey his message *to those who believe* in their hearts *and do righteous deeds* by taking physical action, thus confirming their faith with their good deeds. # Good deeds are described as righteous (salihat) because by means of them people’s affairs, both religious and worldly, in this world and in the hereafter, are set straight or put right (tasluh), and all troubles will be eliminated. Thus he will become one of the righteous (salihoon) who are qualified to be close to the Most Merciful in His paradise. # So give them the glad tidings *that they will have gardens* filled with wonderful trees, fine fruits and extensive shade, hence the one who enters this garden will enjoy it and the one who dwells in it will be happy. #*through which rivers flow* that is, rivers of water, milk, honey and wine, which they will cause to spring up whenever they want and direct them wherever they want; those trees will be irrigated by them and will produce all kinds of fruits. #*Every time they are provided with fruits therefrom, they will say: This is what we were provided with before* that is, this is the same type, with the same qualities. All of them will be similar in beauty and delicious taste; there will be no fruit that stands out from the others (because all of them will be good). There will be no time in which they are deprived of pleasure; they will constantly have the delight of eating these fruits. # *because they will be given things that resemble one another*. It was said that they will resemble one another in name, but will have different tastes; or that they will resemble one another in colour, but will have different names; or that they will resemble one another in beauty, delicious taste and enjoyability. Perhaps this last view is the one that is correct. Then, having mentioned their dwellings and the provision of food, drink and fruits, Allah mentions their spouses and describes them in the most perfect, concise and clear way: *and they will have therein pure spouses*. He did not describe them as purified from a specific defect; this indicates that they will be pure in all aspects. They will be pure in terms of their attitude and character, free of physical defects, pure in speech and chaste in their gaze. With regard to their attitude, they will be friendly and endearing to their husbands because of their good attitude; they will behave in a manner that is expected of a good wife and will be well-mannered in word and deed. With regard to being physically pure, they will be free of menses, postpartum bleeding, vaginal discharges, urine, stools, mucus, sputum and bad smells. They will also be physically pure in the sense that they will possess perfect beauty, with no physical defect or hint of ugliness; rather they will be good and beautiful (cf. 55: 70). They will be pure in speech and chaste in their gaze, gazing only at their husbands and refraining from all foul speech. # This verse speaks of the giver of glad tidings, the recipients thereof, the things promised in those tidings and the means of attaining what is promised. The giver of glad tidings is the Messenger or those among his Ummah who convey his message. The recipients of the glad tidings are the believers who do righteous deeds. The things promised in these glad tidings are the gardens described in this manner (that is, the gardens of paradise). The means of attaining what is promised is faith and righteous deeds. There is no other way of attaining it. This is the greatest of glad tidings, conveyed by the best of Allah’s creation, highlighting the best means. #It also shows us that it is encouraged to give glad tidings to the believers and to motivate them to do good deeds by referring to the reward and fruits of those deeds. Thus doing such deeds will become light and easy. The greatest good sign (of glad tidings) is when an individual is guided and enabled to believe and do righteous deeds. That is the first sign of glad tidings, and the foundation thereof. The second such sign is when the angels give him glad tidings at the time of death. The final good sign is when he reaches those eternal blessings (in paradise). We ask Allah to make us among those who are given these glad tidings.
2|26-27|2:26. Allah is not ashamed to present an example - that of a mosquito, or of something even more insignificant. Those who believe know that it is truth from their Lord; but those who disbelieve say: What does Allah mean by this example? He causes many to go astray thereby and He guides many thereby, but He does not cause any to go astray thereby except the evildoers. # 2:27. Those who break Allah’s covenant after it has been made binding, and sever the bonds that Allah has commanded to be upheld, and spread mischief in the land - they are the ones who are the losers. # *Allah is not ashamed to present an example* and it does not matter what it is *that of a mosquito, or of something even more insignificant*, because these examples or likenesses convey wisdom and highlight the truth, and Allah is not ashamed to tell the truth. It is as if this is a response to those who disliked the giving of examples that referred to insignificant things and objected to Allah doing such a thing. But there is no room for objection here; rather this is a means by which Allah teaches His slaves and it is a sign of His mercy towards them. So it should be accepted gratefully. Hence Allah says: *Those who believe know that it is truth from their Lord*, so they understand it and ponder its meaning. If they understand its message in a comprehensive manner, then their faith and belief will be increased thereby; if not, they still acknowledge that it is truth and that its meaning is true, even if the message is unclear to them. That is because they know that Allah does not give any examples or likenesses in vain; rather there is great wisdom behind it and great blessing in it. #*but those who disbelieve say: What does Allah mean by this example* They object to it and are confused, which only increases them in disbelief as it increases the believers in faith. Hence Allah says: *He causes many to go astray thereby and He guides many thereby*. This is a description of the response of the believers and disbelievers when Qur’anic verses were believed. Allah says elsewhere: *Whenever a soorah is revealed, some of them [the hypocrites] say: Which of you has this increased in faith? As for those who believe, it does indeed increase their faith and they rejoice. As for those in whose hearts is a disease, it will add doubt to their doubt, and they will die while they are still disbelievers.* (at-Tawbah 9:124-125). # There is no greater blessing to people than the revelation of Qur’anic verses, yet for some it is a trial and a source of confusion and misguidance which only adds further to their evil, whilst for others it is a gift and mercy that increases them in goodness. Glory be to the One Who makes His slaves so different and is the only One Who guides them or leaves them astray. # Then Allah speaks of His wisdom in leaving some of them to go astray, and confirms that the reason for that is justice on His part. *but He does not cause any to go astray thereby except the evildoers* that is, those who rebel and disobey Allah, those who stubbornly oppose the Messengers of Allah, those for whom evildoing is an essential part of their character which they do not seek to change. As wisdom dictates that they should go astray because they are not qualified to be guided, by the same token, His wisdom and grace dictate that those who believe and do righteous deeds should be guided. # Evildoing (fisq) is of two types, the first of which is that which puts one beyond the pale of Islam, such as that which is mentioned in this and similar verses. The second type does not put one beyond the pale of Islam, as mentioned in the verse in which Allah says: *O you who believe, if a wrongdoer comes to you with any news, investigate [and verify the facts]...* (al-Hujurat 49:6).# Then Allah describes the evildoers: *Those who break Allah’s covenant after it has been made binding*. This includes covenants between them and Him as well as covenants between them and other people which Allah has made binding upon them in the strongest terms, but they do not care about those binding obligations; rather they break them, ignore His commands, do that which He has forbidden and transgress the covenants between them and other people. # *and sever the bonds that Allah has commanded to be upheld*. This includes many things. Allah has commanded us to uphold the bond between us and Him by believing in Him, carrying out duties as His slaves. He has commanded us to uphold the bond between us and His Messenger by believing in him, loving him, respecting him and fulfilling our duties towards him. He has also commanded us to uphold the bonds between us and our parents, relatives, friends and all other people by respecting those rights that Allah has commanded us to uphold. # The believers uphold the bonds that Allah has commanded us to uphold and they fulfil the related duties in a proper manner. The evildoers, on the other hand, sever those bonds and ignore them completely, replacing them with evildoing, breaking of ties and striving in sin; this is spreading m ischief in the land. # *they* namely those who meet this description *are the ones who are the losers* in this world and in the hereafter. They are the only ones who are losers, because their losses affect them in all circumstances, whatever they do or say. They do not achieve any success at all, because the condition for righteous deeds to be accepted is faith, so the one who has no faith has no righteous deeds to his credit. This kind of loss is the result of disbelief. However, with regard to that loss that may be the result of disbelief, committing sins or neglecting to do deeds that are recommended, as mentioned in the verse in which Allah says: *Verily man is in a state of utter loss.* (al-‘Asr 103:2) - this is general in application and may include all humans, except those who have the characteristics of faith and righteous deeds, and exhort one another to hold fast to the truth and exhort one another to hold fast to patience (cf 103:3). What loss really means is missing out on something good that one could have achieved and that was within one’s means. 
2|28|2:28. How can you disbelieve in Allah, when you were lifeless, then He gave you life, then He will cause you to die, then He will bring you back to life, then to Him you will return? # This is a question which is intended to reflect astonishment as well as to rebuke and denounce. In other words, how could you disbelieve in Allah, Who created you from nothing and bestowed upon you all types of blessings, then He will cause you to die when you reach the appointed time, and He will requite you in the grave, then He will bring you back to life at the time of the Resurrection, then to Him you will return and He will repay you in full? As you are under His control, encompassed by His kindness and subject to His commands, after which you will be brought to account, is it befitting for you to disbelieve in Him? Can that be anything other than great ignorance and foolishness? Rather what is befitting for you is to believe in Him, be aware of Him, be grateful to Him, fear His punishment and hope for His reward.
2|29|2:29. It is He Who has created for you all things that are on earth, then He turned towards the heaven and made them seven heavens, and He has knowledge of all things. #*It is He Who has created for you all things that are on earth*. He has created for you, out of kindness and mercy towards you, all things on the face of the earth so that you might benefit from them, enjoy them and leam from them. # This verse indicates that the basic principle concerning all things is that they are permissible and pure, because the context here is one of reminding us of His blessings. Excluded from that is everything that is evil or foul; the prohibition on such things may also be understood from the meaning of this verse. Allah has created (all things) for our benefit, so whatever is harmful is excluded from that, and it is a blessing from Him that He has forbidden foul things to us so as to protect us from them. # *then He turned towards the heaven and made them seven heavens, and He has knowledge of all things*. *He turned towards*. The phrase astawa ila (translated here as *turned towards*) has three meanings in the Qur’an. When it appears without any preposition after it, it means attaining a level of complete perfection, as when Allah says concerning Moosa (Moses): *When he reached his prime and became fully mature [astawa]...* (al-Qasas 28: 14). # When it is followed by the preposition 'aid (upon), it means rising above, as when Allah says: *...and then [He] rose over [astawa 'ala] the Throne...* (al-A'raf7:54). When it is followed by the preposition ila (to), it means turning to or deciding, as in this verse, where what is meant is: when Allah had created the earth, he turned to the creation of the heavens. # *and made them seven heavens*. He created them and perfected them *and He has knowledge of all things*. So: *He knows all that goes into the earth and all that comes out of it, and all that descends from heaven and all that ascends to it...* (Saba’34:2) - and: *Allah knows what you conceal and what you disclose.* (an-Nahl 16:19). He knows what is secret and what is yet more hidden. # Mention of Allah’s creation of the universe is often followed by affirmation of His omniscience, as in this verse and as in the verse in which Allah says: *How could He Who created not know His own creation, when He is the Knower of subtleties, the All-Aware?* (al-Mulk 67:14). That is because His creation of all things is the clearest evidence of His knowledge, wisdom and might.
2|30-34|2:30. When your Lord said to the angels: I am going to place on earth successive generations, they said: Will You place therein those who will make mischief therein and shed blood, whilst we glorify You with Your praises and proclaim Your holiness? He said: I know that which you do not know. # 2:31. And He taught Adam the names of all things; then He showed them to the angels, and said: Tell me the names of these if you are right. # 2:32. They said: Glory be to You, we do not know anything except what You have taught us; verily You are the All-Knowing, Most Wise. # 2:33. He said: O Adam! Tell them the names of these [things]. When he had told them their names, [Allah] said: Did I not tell you that 1 know what is unseen in heaven and on earth, and 1 know what you disclose and what you conceal? # 2:34. And when We said to the angels: Prostrate before Adam, and they [all] prostrated except Iblees; he refused and was arrogant; he was one of the disbelievers. # This is the beginning of the passage that speaks of the superiority of Adam (‘alayhi as-salam - peace be upon him), the father of humankind. When Allah wanted to create him, He informed the angels of that and said that He was going to place him on the earth, to be followed by successive generations. # The angels (peace be upon them) said: *Will You place therein those who will make mischief therein* by committing sin *and shed blood?* This (shedding blood) is a specific matter that is mentioned after a general statement (making mischief); it is mentioned in order to highlight the seriousness of killing. This was based on what the angels thought, that the successive generations who were going to dwell on earth would do that, so they declared that the Creator was above creating such a being and that it was not befitting for Him to do so; they glorified Him and declared that they were persistent in worshipping Allah in a manner that was free of any mischief, as they said: *whilst we glorify You with Your praises* that is, we declare You to be above all shortcomings. # *And proclaim Your holiness [nuqaddisu lak]*. It may be understood as meaning: and we proclaim You alone to be holy. The phrase ‘nuqaddisu lak’ may also be understood as meaning: we purify ourselves for Your sake; that is, we purify ourselves by acquiring good characteristics, such as loving, fearing and glorifying Allah, and by ridding ourselves of bad characteristics. Allah said to the angels: *I know* concerning these successive generations *that which you do not know*, because you are speaking on the basis of speculation, whereas 1 know what is apparent and what is hidden, and I know that the good that will result from the creation of these successive generations is many times greater than any evil that may result from it. If there was nothing more involved in that but that Allah wanted to choose from among them the prophets, the siddeeqeen, the martyrs and the righteous; and so that His signs might become manifest to His creation; and so that many acts of worship might be done that would not be done without the creation of these successive generations, such as jihad and so on; and so that the hidden potentials of the sons of Adam, both good and evil, might be demonstrated by means of testing them; and so that His enemies might be distinguished from His close friends, and His supporters from His opponents; and so that the hidden evil in the heart of Iblees, that was the main part of his character, might be made manifest - these are all great reasons, some of which, let alone all of them, would have been sufficient reason for that. # Because the statement of the angels was indicative of their feelings of superiority towards the successive generations that Allah was going to place on earth, Allah wanted to explain to them the superiority of Adam so that they might acknowledge his status and see the perfection of Allah’s wisdom and knowledge. So *He taught Adam the names of all things*, and what these names applied to; in other words, He taught them words and meanings, to the extent that He taught them what to call large and small items. # *then He showed them* that is, the things that were named *to the angels*, as a test for them: would they know what these things were or not? # *and said: Tell me the names of these if you are right*, as you claim to be superior to these successive generations. *They said: Glory be to You* that is, it is not appropriate on our part to raise any objection to You or to go against Your command. *we do not know anything* whatsoever *except what You have taught us* by Your grace and kindness, *verily You are the All-Knowing, Most Wise*; You encompass all things with Your knowledge, so nothing is hidden from You, even so much as a small ant or anything greater than that, on earth or in heaven. # The Most Wise is the One to Whom belongs perfect wisdom from which no creature is excluded; nothing of what He commands is beyond His wisdom. He has not created anything except for a reason and He has not commanded anything except for a reason. Wisdom means putting things in the appropriate place. So the angels recognised the wisdom and knowledge of Allah and acknowledged their own inability to know the slightest thing. They also acknowledged Allah’s grace towards them and His teaching them that which they did not know. # Then Allah said: *O Adam! Tell them the names of these [things]* that is, the names of the things that Allah had shown to the angels but they were unable to name them. # *When he had told them their names*, it became clear to the angels that Adam was superior to them, and they clearly saw the wisdom and knowledge of the Creator in creating these successive generations. # *[Allah] said: Did I not tell you that I know what is unseen in heaven and on earth*. This refers to what is hidden from us, so we do not see it. If He knows what is hidden or unseen, it is more appropriate that He knows what is visible. *and I know what you disclose* that is, show openly *and what you conceal*. # Then Allah commanded them to prostrate to Adam, as a sign of honour and respect to him and as an act of obedience and worship to Allah. So they obeyed the command of Allah and they all hastened to prostrate, *except Iblees; he refused* to prostrate. He was too arrogant to obey the command of Allah and he looked down on Adam and said: *...Should I prostrate before one whom You have created from clay?* (al-lsra' 17:61). This refusal and arrogance on his part stemmed from the disbelief that was a fundamental component of his character. At that point his enmity towards Allah and towards Adam, as well as his disbelief and arrogance, became clear. # We learn several things from these verses, which confirm that Allah spoke and that He still speaks; He says whatever He wills and He speaks as He wills; and He is All-Knowing, Most Wise. We also learn that if the wisdom behind some of the things that Allah creates and some of the things that He commands is hidden to us, what we must do is surrender to Him, assume that it is our reasoning that is flawed, and affirm the wisdom of Allah. In these verses, we also see how Allah cared about the angels and showed kindness to them by teaching them that which they did not know and pointing out to them that of which they were not aware. # These verses also teach us the virtue of knowledge, from several angles. For example, Allah highlighted His knowledge and wisdom to His angels, and He highlighted to them the superiority of Adam, which was based on his knowledge; knowledge is the best characteristic that a person may have; and Allah commanded the angels to prostrate to Adam as an honour to him, when his superiority in knowledge became clear to them. # From this passage we also leam that it is important to test others (by asking them questions first, before giving the answers, instead of giving away information freely); if they are unable to answer when tested, then the one who is superior in terms of knowledge should tell them. This is more effective in proving the point. We also leam from the contrast between the fathers of humanity and of the jinn; the superiority of Adam; the way in which Allah honoured him; the enmity of Iblees towards him; and other lessons. 
2|35-36|2:35. We said: O Adam! Dwell, you and your wife in paradise; and eat freely from it wherever you may wish; but do not approach this tree, or else you will both become transgressors. # 2:36. Then Shaytan made them slip from the [garden] and brought them out of the state [of felicity] they had been in. We said: Go down from here [all of you] as enemies to each other. On earth you will have an abode and your means of livelihood for a while. #When Allah created Adam and honoured him, He completed His blessing towards him by creating from him his wife (Hawwa’), so that he might enjoy the pleasure of living with her and so that he might enjoy her companionship, and He commanded them to dwell in paradise and eat from it in abundance and freely *wherever you may wish*, that is, they were to eat different kinds of fruit. Allah said to him: *[But] here [in paradise] it is granted to you that you will not go hungry or be naked, nor will you be thirsty here [in paradise] or suffer from the sun’s heat.* (Ta Ha 20:118-119). # *but do not approach this tree* which was one kind of the trees of paradise; Allah knows best what it was. He only forbade them to approach it as a test and trial, or for a reason that is not known to us. «(or else you will both become transgressors)?. This indicates that the prohibition was in the sense of it being haram (forbidden), because it would result in transgression or wrongdoing. # But their enemy kept whispering to them and making attractive to them the idea of eating that which was forbidden to them, until he caused them to slip; in other words he made them slip by making it look good to them: *And he swore to them both [saying]: I am to you a sincere adviser.* (al-A‘raf 7:21) - and they were deceived by him and they obeyed him. Thus he caused them to be expelled from the state of felicity and abundance in which they had been, and to be sent down to the realm of exhaustion, striving and struggle. # *as enemies to each other*. What is meant is that Adam and his progeny would be enemies of Iblees and his progeny. It is well known that enemies strive hard to cause harm to one another and to deprive one another of good by all means. This is an implicit warning to the sons of Adam against Shaytan, as Allah says: *Verily, the Shaytan is an enemy to you, so take him as an enemy. He only calls his followers so that they may become inhabitants of the raging fire.* (Fatir 35:6). *...Will you then take him and his progeny as allies instead of Me, even though they are enemies to you? What a wretched exchange for the wrongdoers!* (al-Kahf 18:50). # Then Allah speaks of their destination on earth: *On earth you will have an abode* that is, a dwelling place *and your means of livelihood for a while*, until the end of your allotted time, then you will move from the earth to the realm for which you were created and which was created for you. This verse tells us that the duration of this life is brief and transient. This world is not our true home; rather it is a place through which we pass and from which we seek provision to help us reach that other realm, and it is not to be regarded as our permanent abode.
2|37|2:37. Then Adam received som e words from his Lord, and He accepted his repentance, for He is the A ccepter of repentance, the Most Merciful. # *Then Adam received some words from his Lord* that is, Allah inspired him and prompted him. This refers to the words: *...Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves. If You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we will certainly be among the losers.* (al-A'raf 7:23). So Adam admitted his sin and asked Allah for His forgiveness. *and He* that is, Allah *accepted his repentance* and had mercy on him. *For He is the Accepter of repentance* for the one who turns to Him. Allah’s acceptance of repentance is indicated by two things: being guided to repent, then repentance is accepted when all its conditions are met. *the Most Merciful* towards His slaves. By His mercy towards them, He guides and enables them to repent, and He forgives them.
2|38-39|2:38. We said: Go down from here, all of you; then when guidance com es from Me, whosoever follows My guidance will have no fear nor will they grieve. # 2:39. But those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, they shall be inhabitants of the fire; they shall abide therein forever. # The idea of getting down is repeated as the basis for what comes next, which is the words *then when guidance comes from Me*. In other words, whenever guidance comes from Me, O humankind and jinn; that is, a Messenger and a Book which will guide you to that which will bring you closer to Me and help you to do that which pleases Me. *whosoever* among you *follows My guidance*, by believing in My Messengers and Books and following them, which means believing in everything the Messengers and Books say, obeying the commands and heeding the prohibitions *will have no fear nor will they grieve*. Elsewhere, Allah says: *...whoever follows My guidance will not go astray or suffer wretchedness.* (Ta Ha 20:123). # Thus, four things will result from following His guidance: The one who does that will be safe from fear and grief. The difference between them is that if harm has already befallen a person, that causes grief, and if it is still expected (and has not yet happened), that causes fear. But here Allah tells us that the one who follows His guidance will be safe from both, and the one who is safe from both will attain the opposite, which is complete security. Similarly, Allah states that the one who follows His guidance will not go astray and will not fall into misery; again, the one who is safe from both will attain the opposite, which is guidance and happiness. So the one who follows His guidance will attain security and happiness in this world and the hereafter, and he will be protected from any negative outcomes, such as fear, grief, misguidance and misery. Thus he will attain what he is seeking, and what he fears will be warded off from him. This is the opposite of the one who does not follow His guidance, disbelieves in Him and rejects His signs. # *they shall be inhabitants of the fire* that is, they will be the ones who stay in it and do not depart from it. *they shall abide therein forever* they will never come out of it, the punishment will never be reduced for them and they will never be helped. # These and similar verses indicate that creation, both humans and jinn, will be divided into two groups: those who are blessed (destined for paradise) and those who are doomed (destined for hell). These verses also describe the two groups and the deeds that may lead to that. The jinn are like humans with regard to the reward and punishment, just as they are like them with regard to commands and prohibitions.
2|40-43|2:40. O Children of Israel! Remember the favours which I bestowed upon you, and fulfil your covenant with Me and I shall fulfil My covenant with you, and fear none but Me. # 2:41. And believe in what I have sent down, which confirms that which is [already] with you, and do not be the first to disbelieve therein or sell My revelations for a small price; and fear Me, and Me alone. # 2:42. And do not confuse truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth knowingly. # 2:43. And establish prayer, give zakah; and bow [in worship] with those who bow. # Then Allah begins to remind the Children of Israel of His favours and kindness towards them: *O Children of Israel! Remember the favours which I bestowed upon you, and fulfil your covenant with Me and I shall fulfil My covenant with you, and fear none but Me. And believe in what I have sent down, which confirms that which is [already] with you, and do not be the first to disbelieve therein or sell My revelations for a small price; and fear Me, and Me alone. And do not confuse truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth knowingly. And establish prayer, give zakah; and bow [in worship] with those who bow.* (al-Baqarah 2:40-43). # *O Children of Israel* the name Israel here refers to Ya'qoob, and it is addressed to all the tribes of the Jews who were in Madinah and its environs, as well as those who would come after them. Thus Allah commanded them in general terms: *Remember the favours which I bestowed upon you*. This includes all the favours and blessings, some of which are mentioned in this soorah. What is meant is remembering them and acknowledging them in the heart, praising Allah verbally for them and using these blessings in ways that Allah loves and is pleased with. # *and fulfil your covenant with Me*. This refers to the covenant that He made with them, that they should believe in Him and His Messengers, and establish His laws. *and I shall fulfil My covenant with you* which is that He will reward them for that. # What is meant by that is what Allah mentions in the following verse: *Allah took a covenant from the Children of Israel, and We appointed twelve leaders from among them. And Allah said: I am with you; if you establish prayer, give zakah, believe in My Messengers and support them, and lend to Allah a goodly loan, I will surely expiate your bad deeds for you, and admit you to gardens through which rivers flow. But if any of you, after this, disbelieves, he will indeed have strayed from the right path.* (al-Ma’idah 5:12). # Then He points out the reason that should compel them to fulfil His covenant, which is fear of Him alone; for anyone who fears Him, that fear will make him obey His commands and heed His prohibitions. # Then a specific instruction is issued to them, without which their faith is not complete or valid: *And believe in what I have sent down*, namely the Qur’an which He sent down to His slave and Messenger Muhammad ﷺ. Here He is commanding them to believe in it and follow it, which implies that they should also believe in the one to whom it was sent down. The motive for their belief in it is also mentioned: *which confirms that which is [already] with you* that is, it is in harmony with it and does not contradict it. As it is in harmony with the scriptures that you already have, and does not contradict them, then there is no reason why you should not believe in it, because it brings the same message as all the Messengers brought. So it is more appropriate that you should believe in it, because you are the people of scriptures and knowledge. # Moreover, the words *which confirms that which is [already] with you* indicate that if you do not believe in it, that will backfire on you and will imply that you have rejected the scriptures that you already have, because the message it brings is the same as that which was bought by Moosa, ‘Eesa and other Prophets. So by rejecting it, you are also rejecting what you have with you. # Furthermore, in the scriptures that you have with you, there is a description and foretelling of this Prophet ﷺ who has brought this Qur’an. Hence if you do not believe in him, then you will have rejected some of that which was revealed to you, and the one who rejects some of that which has been revealed to him has in fact rejected all of it, just as the one who disbelieves in one message has in fact disbelieved in all of them. # When Allah commanded them to believe in the Qur’an, He also forbade and warned them against the opposite, which is disbelief in it, as He says: *and do not be the first to disbelieve therein* that is, in the Qur’an and the Messenger. # The phrase *the first to disbelieve therein* is more eloquent than telling them, do not disbelieve in it, because if they were the first to disbelieve in it, that would mean that they were hastening to disbelieve in it, which is the opposite of what is expected from them; thus their sin and the sins of those who follow their example after them will be upon them. # Then Allah mentions that which is preventing them from believing, which is their preferring immediate worldly gains over eternal bliss. Allah says: *do not...sell My revelations for a small price*. That price is what they gain of (worldly) status and accumulation which they think will cease if they believe in Allah and His Messenger, so they trade the verses of Allah for those things, preferring them and giving precedence to them. # *and fear Me, and Me alone* that is, none other than Me. If you fear Allah alone, your fear of Him dictates that you should give precedence to belief in His revelations over that small gain, just as choosing the small gain (instead of faith) is indicative of the absence of fear of Allah in your hearts. # Then Allah says: *And do not confuse* that is, mix, *truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth knowingly*. Here Allah is forbidding two things to them: mixing truth with falsehood, and concealing the truth. That is because what is expected of the people of scriptures and knowledge is that they should distinguish between truth and falsehood and propagate the truth, so that people might be guided thereby, those who have gone astray might be brought back, and proof might be established against those who stubbornly reject faith, because Allah has made His revelations clear and has clarified His evidence, so as to distinguish truth from falsehood and to distinguish the path of those who are guided from the path of the evildoers. Any of the people of knowledge who acts upon that is one of the successors of the Messengers and is one of those who lead the people to guidance. # The one who confuses truth with falsehood, not distinguishing between them, and knowingly conceals the truth that he knows and is enjoined to disclose openly, is one of the callers to hell, because with regard to matters of religion, the people only follow their scholars. So choose for yourself one of these two options. # Then He says *And establish prayer* that is, performing the physical movements properly, with focus and presence of mind *give zakah* to those who are entitled to receive it *and bow [in worship] with those who bow* that is, pray with those who pray. If you do that, whilst believing in the Messengers and revelations of Allah, then you will have combined both visible and hidden actions, joining sincerity towards Allah with kindness towards His slaves, and combining acts of worship in the heart with physical and financial acts of worship. # *and bow [in worship] with those who bow* that is, pray with those who pray. This is a command which indicates that it is obligatory to pray in congregation and that bowing is one of the pillars or essential parts of the prayer. Here prayer is referred to as bowing; when an act of worship is referred to by one of its parts, this indicates that that part of the act of worship is obligatory.
2|44|2:44. Do you enjoin righteousness upon people while you ignore your own selves, even though you study the scripture? Will you not understand? # *Do you enjoin righteousness upon people* that is, do you tell them to believe and do good *while you ignore your own selves* that is, you do not remind yourselves to do that, at the time when *you study the scripture? Will you not understand?*. The root meaning of the word ‘aql (reasoning or understanding) is to make a person understand that which will benefit him and restrain him from doing that which will harm him. Reason encourages the individual to be the first one to do what he tells others to do, and the first one to refrain from what he tells others not to do. If a person tells others to do good but does not do it himself, and he tells them not to commit evil but does not refrain from it himself, that indicates that he in fact has no understanding and is ignorant, especially if he does that knowingly. Thus proof is established against him. # Although this verse was revealed concerning the Children of Israel, it is general in meaning and applies to everyone, because Allah says: *O you who believe, why do you say that which you do not do? It is most loathsome to Allah that you say that which you do not do.* (as-Saff 61:2-3). # There is nothing in the verse to indicate that if a person does not do what he is enjoining others to do, then he should give up enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil, because it is well known that the individual has two duties: enjoining (what is good) and forbidding (what is evil) to others, and doing likewise for himself. The fact that he gives up doing one of them does not mean that he has a concession allowing him to give up the other. Perfection is attained when the individual does both duties, and the worst-case scenario is when he gives up both. As for doing one of them and not the other, it is not as good as the former, but it is not as bad as the latter. Moreover, it is human nature that people do not follow those whose deeds contradict their words; deeds are more likely to be heeded and emulated than mere words. 
2|45-48|2:45. Seek help through patience and prayer. Indeed it is hard, except for the humble, # 2:46. Who are certain that they are going to meet their Lord, and that to Him they will return. # 2:47. O Children of Israel! Remember the blessings which I bestowed upon you and how I favoured you above all other people. # 2:48. Then guard yourselves against a day when no soul shall avail another at all and neither intercession nor ransom will be accepted from it, nor will they be helped. # Here, Allah commands them to seek help in their affairs by being patient in all situations. That means being patient in obeying Allah so that one may fulfil one’s obligations properly, and being patient in refraining from disobedience, so that one may be able to keep away from it altogether. It also includes patience in accepting the decree of Allah when it is painful, so as to avoid becoming angry or discontented with it. Having patience and compelling oneself to do what Allah has enjoined is a great help in all situations. As a person strives to be patient, Allah will grant him patience. That also applies to prayer, which is the foundation of faith and keeps one from committing shameful and evil deeds. By means of prayer, a person may seek help in all his affairs. # *Indeed it* that is, prayer *is hard* that is, difficult *except for the humble*. It is easy and light for them, because humility, fear of Allah and hope for that which is with Him makes them do it happily, because they have the hope of reward and the fear of punishment. This is unlike the one who is not like that, for he has no motivation to do it, and if he does do it, it is one of the most burdensome of things for him. # Humility means submission of the heart, being tranquil and turning to Allah, expressing one’s utter need of Him, having faith in Him and believing in the meeting with Him. Hence He says: *Who are certain that they are going to meet their Lord*, and He will requite them for their deeds *and that to Him they will return*. This belief is what makes acts of worship easier for them, gives them consolation at the time of calamity, raises their spirits at the time of crisis and deters them from doing bad deeds. They are the ones who will find eternal bliss in paradise. As for the one who does not believe in the meeting with his Lord, prayer and other acts of worship are among the most difficult things for him. # Then Allah again reminds the Children of Israel of His blessings, as an exhortation and warning, and He instils in them fear of the Day of Resurrection, *when no soul*, even if it is one of the noble souls, such as the Prophets and the righteous, *shall avail* that is, be able to help *another*, even if the latter is the closest of family members *at all* in any way, great or small; rather the only thing that will benefit an individual is righteous deeds that he sent on ahead. # *and neither intercession nor ransom will be accepted from it* that is, that soul will not be able to intercede for anyone without the permission of Allah and His approval of the one for whom intercession is sought, for Allah does not accept any deed except that which is intended for His sake and is in accordance with the straight path and the Sunnah. And no ransom will be accepted either: *If the wrongdoers had everything on earth, and as much again with it, they would offer it to ransom themselves from the terrible punishment on the Day of Resurrection...* (az-Zumar 39:47). # But that will not be accepted from them, *nor will they be helped* that is, no harm will be warded off from them. This highlights the fact that there will be no benefit from any created being in any way. The words *no soul shall avail another at all* have to do with obtaining benefits, and the words *nor will they be helped* have to do with warding off harm. # *neither intercession nor ransom will be accepted from it* - there will be no benefit from anyone that a person could seek in return for something, such as a ransom or intercession. This makes a person cut off any attachment to created beings, because he knows that they cannot bring him the slightest benefit; and it makes him put all his trust in Allah, Who is the One Who brings benefits and wards off harm; so he should worship Him alone, with no partner or associate, and seek His help in worshipping Him.
2|49-57|2:49. And [remember] when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh, who were subjecting you to grievous torment, slaughtering your sons and letting your womenfolk live; in that was a great trial from your Lord. # 2:50. And [remember] when We parted the sea for you and saved you while We drowned Pharaoh’s people while you were looking on. # 2:51. And [remember] when We appointed for Moosa forty nights, and in his absence you took the calf [for worship], and thus became transgressors. # 2:52. Yet, even after that We forgave you, so that you might be grateful. # 2:53. And [remember] when We gave Moosa the scripture and the criterion [between right and wrong] so that you might be guided aright. # 2:54. And [remember] when Moosa said to his people: O my people! You have indeed wronged yourselves by taking the calf [for worship]. So repent to your Maker, and kill [the guilty ones among] you; that will be best for you with your Maker. Then He accepted your repentance, for He is the Accepter of repentance, the Most Merciful. # 2:55. And [remember] when you said: O Moosa! We will never believe in you until we see Allah with our own eyes, but a thunderbolt struck you while you were looking on. # 2:56. Then We brought you back to life after your death, so that you might be grateful. # 2:57. And We shaded you with clouds and sent down to you manna and quails, saying: Eat of the good things We have provided for you. Indeed, they did not wrong Us; rather they wronged their own souls. # This is the beginning of a detailed list of Allah’s blessings to the Children of Israel: *And [remember] when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh* that is, from Pharaoh and his people and troops, who prior to that had been *subjecting you* that is, they had been using and abusing them *to grievous torment* that is, the harshest possible torment *slaughtering your sons* for fear of your numbers increasing *and letting your womenfolk live* that is, not killing them; thus you were caught between being slain or being subject to hard labour, left alive as if a favour was being done to you by the people who looked down at you, which is the ultimate humiliation. But Allah blessed them by saving them completely and drowning their enemy while they were looking on, so that they might rejoice. # *in that* that is, in saving you (from Pharaoh) *was a great trial* that is, a test *from your Lord*. This is one of the things that require you to give thanks to Him and to obey His commands. # Then Allah mentions His blessing to them when He appointed for Moosa forty nights in order to send down to him the Torah which was filled with great blessings and benefits, but they could not wait until the completion of that appointed time; rather they began worshipping the calf in his absence. # *and thus became transgressors*, fully aware of your transgression, as proof had already been established against you, which made it a greater offence and a more grievous sin. Then Allah commanded you on the lips of His Prophet Moosa to repent, and to kill the guilty ones among you, after which Allah forgave you because of that, *so that you might be grateful* to Allah. #*And [remember] when you said: O Moosa! We will never believe in you until we see Allah with our own eyes*. This was the utmost transgression and audacity towards Allah and towards His Messenger. *but a thunderbolt* that is, either death or deep unconsciousness *struck you while you were looking on* - that happened when you were all looking at one another. *Then We brought you back to life after your death, so that you might be grateful*. Then Allah mentions His favours to you when you were wandering in the wilderness, as He bestowed upon you shade and ample provision: *And We shaded you with clouds and sent down to you manna*. Manna is a generic word that applies to all kinds of provision that are acquired without effort, such as ginger, truffles and so on. #*and quails*. The quail is a small bird, the flesh of which is palatable. The manna and quails would come down to them in sufficient quantities to nourish them. *Eat of the good things We have provided for you* that is, provision the like of which even those who dwell in cities and live a life of luxury do not have. But they were not grateful for this blessing, and they continued to be hardhearted and to commit many sins. # *Indeed, they did not wrong Us* by doing these deeds that were contrary to Our commands, for Allah is not harmed by the disobedience of those who disobey Him, just as He does not benefit from the obedience of those who obey Him. *rather they wronged their own souls* because the harm of those actions came back to them. 
2|58-59|2:58. And [remember] when We said: Go into this town, and eat freely from it wherever you may wish; but enter the gate bowing down [with humility] and say: Relieve us [from the burden of our sins]. We will forgive you your sins and increase [the reward] of those who do good. # 2:59. But the wrongdoers changed the word to something other than what they had been told; so We sent down upon the wrongdoers a plague from heaven, because of their defiant disobedience. # This is a further part of the blessings that Allah bestowed upon them after they had disobeyed Him. He commanded them to enter a town, which would become a place where they could settle and live a life of dignity, and in which they would have abundant provision. But they were to enter it showing humility towards Allah in their actions, by entering the gate *bowing down [with humility]*, and in their words, by saying: *Relieve us [from the burden of our sins]*, asking Allah to relieve them of their sins by virtue of their asking Him for His forgiveness. # *We will forgive you your sins* by virtue of your asking for forgiveness *and increase [the reward] of those who do good* by virtue of their good deeds, by granting them reward in this world and in the hereafter *But the wrongdoers changed the word* that is, the wrongdoers among them. This means that not all of them did this, because not all of them changed the word. # *to something other than what they had been told*. So instead of saying hittatun *Relieve us [from the burden of our sins]*, they said habbah fee hintah (a grain of wheat), making fun of and mocking the command of Allah. Since they changed the word, even though it was easy for them to say it, it is more likely that they changed the actions required of them. Hence they entered the gate shuffling on their bottoms. Furthermore, since this transgression was the greatest reason for the punishment that befell them, Allah said: *so We sent down upon the wrongdoers* among them *a plague* that is, a punishment *from heaven, because of their defiant disobedience* that is, because of their evildoing and transgression.
2|60|2:60. And [remember] when Moosa prayed for water for his people; We said: Strike the rock with your staff. Then twelve springs gushed forth from it and each tribe knew its own drinking place. So eat and drink of the sustenance provided by Allah, and do not strive to spread mischief in the land. # Moosa prayed for water from which they could drink. # *We said: Strike the rock with your staff.* This refers either to a specific rock that was known to him, or to any rock. *Then twelve springs gushed forth from it*; the number of Israelite tribes was twelve. *and each tribe* among them *knew its own drinking place* among these springs, so that there would be no pushing and shoving; rather they would be able to drink easily, without any disturbance. Hence Allah said: *So eat and drink of the sustenance provided by Allah*, meaning that which comes to you without any effort on your part, *and do not strive to spread mischief in the land* that is, do not try to cause ruin and spread mischief.
2|61|2:61. And [remember] when you said: O Moosa! We cannot bear to eat only one kind of food; so pray to your Lord for us to bring forth for us of what the earth produces, its herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils and onions. He said: Would you exchange that which is better for that which is inferior? Go down to any town, and you will find what you want! They were struck with humiliation and wretchedness; they incurred the wrath of Allah. That was because they rejected the signs of Allah and killed the Prophets unjustly. That was because of their disobedience and transgression. # What is meant is: remember when you said to Moosa, by way of expressing boredom with the blessings of Allah and scorning them: *O Moosa! We cannot bear to eat only one kind of food*. Although, as we stated above, there were different types of food, the variety was limited. # *so pray to your Lord for us to bring forth for us of what the earth produces, its herbs* - the word translated here as *herbs* refers to plants other than trees - *cucumbers, garlic, lentils and onions*. # Moosa said to them: *Would you exchange that which is better* namely the manna and quails *for that which is inferior* namely the foods mentioned; this is not befitting for you, because the foods you are asking for can be found in any town that you go down to. As for the food with which Allah has blessed you, it is the best and finest of food, so how can you ask for something else in its stead? # Since their behaviour was the greatest evidence of their lack of patience and their scorning the commands and blessings of Allah, He gave them an appropriate punishment, as He said: *They were struck with humiliation* that could be seen in their physical appearance, and *wretchedness* in their hearts, so that they had no self-respect or high ambitions; rather their souls were low and vile, and their aspirations were the worst of aspirations, *they incurred the wrath of Allah* that is, they did not gain anything but the wrath of Allah; what a bad return, and what a bad situation they found themselves in. # *That* - the reason why they deserved His wrath - *was because they rejected the signs of Allah* that pointed to the truth. When they rejected His signs, He punished them by becoming angry with them. That was also because they *killed the Prophets unjustly*. # Allah says *unjustly* to emphasise the abhorrent nature of the crime; otherwise it is well known that killing a Prophet can never be just or lawful. It also indicates that no one should think that they were ignorant or lacking in knowledge. # *That was because of their disobedience* in committing sin *and transgression* against the slaves of Allah. One sin leads to another: negligence leads to minor sin, from which stems major sin, which in turn leads to various kinds of innovation, disbelief and so on. We ask Allah to keep us safe and sound from all trials. # These verses are addressed to the Israelite community that existed at the time when the Qur’an was revealed; the deeds referred to were committed by their forebears, but were attributed to them for several reasons, such as the following: # - They used to boast about and praise themselves, claiming that they were superior to Muhammad ﷺ and those who believed in him. By referring to the attitude of their predecessors, which was well known to them, Allah explained to each of them that they were not people of patience, high morals or good deeds. If this is how their ancestors were, when it is expected that the ancestors would be of a higher status and had a better attitude than those who came after them, then how about those who are addressed here? # - The blessings of Allah that were bestowed upon their predecessors also reached the later generations; a blessing for the fathers is also a blessing for the sons, which is why they are addressed here, because they were also included in the blessing. # - It is addressed to them as if they were the ones who did those deeds, which indicates that members of a community that follows one religion support one another and help one another with regard to that which serves the common interest, so that it is as if the earlier and later generations all lived at the same time. The action of one of them is like the action of all of them, because what some of them do of good deeds will benefit all of them, and what some of them do of evil deeds will bring harm to all of them. # - The latter generation did not denounce most of their predecessors’ deeds, and the one who approves of sin is a partner in it. # And there are other reasons which are known only to Allah. # Then Allah says, differentiating between various groups of the People of the Book: *Those who believe [in the Prophet], and those who are Jews, and the Christians and the Sabians - whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and does righteous deeds, will have their reward with their Lord; they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.* (al-Baqarah 2:62). 
2|62|2:62. Those who believe [in the Prophet], and those who are Jews, and the Christians and the Sabians - whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and does righteous deeds, will have their reward with their Lord; they will have no fear, nor will they grieve. # This ruling applies to the People of the Book only, because the Sabians, according to the correct view, are one of the Christian sects. Here Allah tells us that the believers of this Ummah, and those among the Jews, Christians and Sabians, who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and believe in their Messengers, will have a great reward and well-being; they will have no fear nor will they grieve. As for those among these communities who disbelieve in Allah, His Messengers and the Last Day, they will be in the opposite state, that of fear and grief. # The correct view is that this ruling applies to these groups as they were, and it does not refer to believing in Muhammad ﷺ, as it speaks of them at a time before the mission of Muhammad ﷺ began, and this is how they were then. This is how it is with the Qur’an: if some people find that some verses are not clear to them, they have to look for others that will clarify the matter, because it is a Revelation from One Who knows all things before they happen, and Whose mercy encompasses all things. The way in which this may be clarified - and Allah knows best - is that when the Qur’an mentions the Children of Israel and criticises them for their sins and abhorrent deeds, that may give the impression that all of the Israelites are subject to this condemnation. Hence the Creator highlighted those who were not subject to this condemnation by referring to those others (who were not subject to it). As He mentioned the Children of Israel in particular, this may give the impression that this ruling applies to them only; hence Allah mentioned the general ruling that applies to all these other groups, so as to clarify the truth and dispel confusion and doubt. Glory be to the One Who has included in His Book that which dazzles the minds of those who have knowledge. # Then Allah goes back to rebuking the Children of Israel for what their predecessors did: *And [remember] when We made a covenant with you and We raised the Mount above you, [saying]: Hold fast to what We have given you and bear in mind what is in it, so that you may become pious. But after that you turned away, and were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah to you, you certainly would have been among the losers.* (al-Baqarah 2:63-64). 
2|63-64|2:63. And [remember] when We made a covenant with you and We raised the Mount above you, [saying]: Hold fast to what We have given you and bear in mind what is in it, so that you may become pious. # 2:64. But after that you turned away, and were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah to you, you certainly would have been among the losers. # That is, remember *when We made a covenant with you*. This refers to a solemn pledge, which is further emphasised by the fearful event of the raising of the Mount above them. It was said to them: *Hold fast* that is, with determination, effort and patience in obeying Allah *to what We have given you* of the Torah *and bear in mind what is in it* that is, what is in your Book, by reciting it and learning it, *so that you may become pious*, fearing the punishment and wrath of Allah. But after this emphasis on the pledge, *you turned away*, which made it inevitable that the severest of penalties should befall you, *and were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah to you, you certainly would have been among the losers*. 
2|65-66|2:65. And you certainly know those amongst you who broke the Sabbath, whereupon We said to them: Be apes, despised and rejected. # 2:66. So We made their fate an example to their own generation and to those who came after them, and a lesson to those who fear Allah. # That is, the situation of *those amongst you who broke the Sabbath* is something with which you are very familiar. They are the ones whose story is told in detail in Soorat al-A‘raf, where Allah says: *Ask them about the town which was by the sea and how they broke the Sabbath...* (al-A‘raf 7:163) # Because of this grave sin, they deserved the wrath of Allah and the punishment of being turned into *apes, despised and rejected* that is, disdained and humiliated. # Allah made this punishment ^an example to their own generation^ that is, the nations that witnessed it and those whom the news reached at that time *and to those who came after them*. Thus proof was established against people; this story also serves to deter people from disobeying Allah. But it is not a beneficial lesson for anyone except those who fear Allah; others do not benefit from His signs.
2|67-74|2:67. And [remember] when Moosa said to his people: Allah commands you to sacrifice a cow. They said: Are you mocking us? He said: Allah forbid that I should be so ignorant! # 2:68. They said: Pray to your Lord to make clear to us what [sort of cow] it should be. He said: He [Allah] says: The cow should be neither too old nor too young, but somewhere in between. Now do as you are commanded! # 2:69. They said: Pray to your Lord to make clear to us what her colour should be. He said: He [Allah] says: A yellow cow, pure and rich in colour, pleasing to the beholder. # 2:70. They said: Pray to your Lord to make clear to us [exactly] what she is, because to us all cows look alike. And surely, if Allah wills, we will be guided. # 2:71. He said: He [Allah] says: A cow not broken in to till the earth or water the fields; sound and whole, without blemish. They said: Now you have brought the truth. Then they offered her in sacrifice, although they almost failed to do so. # 2:72. And [remember] when you killed a man and disputed among yourselves concerning [the crime], but Allah brought forth that which you were concealing. # 2:73. So We said: Strike the [body] with a piece of the [sacrificed cow]. Thus Allah brings the dead to life and shows you His signs, that you may understand. # 2:74. Then after that, your hearts were hardened, and became like a rock or even harder. For among rocks there are some from which rivers spring forth; others which, when they cleave asunder, send forth water; and others which tumble down for fear of Allah. And Allah is not unaware of what you do. # That is, remember what happened to you with Moosa, when you killed a man and disputed amongst yourselves concerning the crime. In other words, you argued as to who killed him, until the matter nearly got out of hand and almost - were it not for Allah guiding you - resulted in great turmoil amongst you. Then Moosa told you how to find out about the murderer: Slaughter a cow. You should have hastened to obey his orders and should not have objected to them, but you insisted on objecting, and said: *Are you mocking us?*. The Prophet of Allah said: *Allah forbid that I should be so ignorant!* The ignorant man is the one who speaks nonsense, in which there is no benefit, and he is the one who mocks people. The wise man, on the other hand, thinks that one of the greatest shameful acts that undermine one’s religious commitment and rational thinking is mocking a person who is a human being like him; even if he is superior to him, that superiority requires him to show gratitude to his Lord and compassion towards His slaves. # When Moosa said that to them, they realised that he was speaking the truth, and said: *Pray to your Lord to make clear to us what [sort of cow] it should be*; how old should it be? *He said: He [Allah] says: The cow should be neither too old nor too young, but somewhere in between. Now do as you are commanded!* - and stop confusing the matter with so many questions. # *They said: Pray to your Lord to make clear to us what her colour should be. He said: He [Allah] says: A yellow cow, pure and rich in colour* that is, of a deep colour *pleasing to the beholder* with its beauty. # *They said: Pray to your Lord to make clear to us [exactly] what she is, because to us all cows look alike*, and we still do not know what you want. *And surely, if Allah wills, we will be guided*. #*He said: He [Allah] says: A cow not broken in* that is, trained *to till the earth* by ploughing *or water the fields* that is, she is not used for the purpose of irrigation; *sound and whole* that is, free of defects and not having been used for work; *without blemish* that is, there are no patches of any colour other than what was mentioned above. *They said: Now you have brought the truth* that is, now you have brought us a clear explanation. They said this because of their ignorance, for the truth had come to them from the outset. If they had gone and fetched any cow, they would have done what they were meant to do, but they made it difficult for themselves by asking too many questions, so Allah made it difficult for them. If they had not said *if Allah wills*, they would not have been guided concerning this matter. *Then they offered her* that is, the cow that met that description *in sacrifice, although they almost failed to do so* because of their asking too many questions. # When they had slaughtered her, [Allah] said: *Strike* the slain man with part of her, either a specific part or any part of the cow’s body. There is no benefit in specifying which part it was. So they struck him with part of the cow, and Allah brought him back to life and disclosed what they were concealing, as he identified his killer. His being brought back to life whilst they were watching was a sign that Allah can bring the dead back to life, *that you may understand* and be deterred from doing that which will cause you harm. # *Then after that, your hearts were hardened* that is, they became harsh and rough, unable to benefit from any exhortation. *Then after that* means, after Allah bestowed upon you great blessings and showed you His signs, after which your hearts should not have become hard, because what you had seen should have softened your hearts and made them humble. Then Allah describes their hardheartedness as being *like a rock*, which is harder than iron, because iron and lead melt when they are exposed to fire, but rocks do not melt. # *or even harder* means, not less hard than rocks. Then Allah describes how rocks are better than their hearts, as He says: *For among rocks there are some from which rivers spring forth; others which, when they cleave asunder, send forth water; and others which tumble down for fear of Allah*. In these ways rocks are superior to their hearts. Then He issues a sterner warning, and says: *And Allah is not unaware of what you do*; rather He knows and keeps a record of all your deeds, great and small, and He will requite you for them in the fullest manner. # It should be noted that many of the commentators (may Allah have mercy on them) went to great lengths in filling their books with the stories taken from Jewish sources, and they tried to interpret the verses of the Qur’an in the light of these stories, making them like a commentary for the Book of Allah. They gave as evidence for their action the hadith in which the Prophet ﷺ said: *Narrate from the Children of Israel, and it does not matter.* (Bukhari). # What I think is that even if it is permissible to narrate their stories and reports, that is only to be done in isolation, not in the context of discussing the meanings of Qur’an or any issue of Sharia. It is not permissible to make them a means of interpreting the Book of Allah at all, unless it is proven to be soundly narrated from the Messenger of Allah. That is because the status of these stories and reports is reflected in the hadith: *Do not believe the People of the Book and do not disbelieve them.* (Bukhari) # As their status is somewhat dubious, and it is well known in Islam that we must believe in the Qur’an and be certain about its wording and its meanings, it is not permissible for us to use these stories, which were transmitted by unknown narrators in reports that in most, if not all, cases are most likely to be lies, to explain the meanings of the Qur’an in a definitive manner and without doubting them. In fact it is because of heedlessness regarding this issue that what happened came to pass. And Allah is the source of strength.
2|75-78|2:75. Do you [O believers] then hope that they will respond to your call, when a party among them used to hear the word of Allah, and they distorted it knowingly after having understood it? # 2:76. When they meet the believers, they say: We [too] believe: But when they meet one another in private, they say: Why are you telling them what Allah has disclosed to you [of the description of the Prophet in the Torah], that they may use it in argument against you before your Lord? Have you no sense? # 2:77. Do they not realise that Allah knows what they conceal and what they disclose? # 2:78. And there are among them unlettered people, who have no knowledge of the Book, except wishful thinking, and they have nothing but [mere] speculation. #These verses put an end to the believers’ hopes that the People of the Book would believe. In other words, do not raise your hopes about them becoming believers, because the way they are does not give rise to any such hope. They used to distort the words of Allah after having learned and understood them; they interpreted them in a way different than what Allah intended, in order to give people the impression that it came from Allah, when it did not come from Allah. If this is how they are with regard to their own Book, which they regard as a source of great pride and honour, and as the basis of their religion, yet they took it as a means to turn people away from the path of Allah, then how can it be hoped that they would believe and respond to your call? That is highly unlikely. # Then Allah describes the condition of the hypocrites among the People of the Book: *When they meet the believers, they say: We [too] believe*. They pretended to be believers and they paid lip service to a faith that was not in their hearts *But when they meet one another in private* and no one else is present other than their co-religionists, they say to one another: *Why are you telling them what Allah has disclosed to you [of the description of the Prophet in the Torah* that is, why do you pretend to believe and tell them that you are like them, when that will be proof for them against you, because they will say: They affirmed that what we are following is truth and what they are following is falsehood. Thus they (the believers) will use that against you before your Lord. *Have you no sense?* That is, do you not have the sense to stop doing that which may be used against you? This is what they say to one another. #*Do they not realise that Allah knows what they conceal and what they disclose?* So even though they concealed what they believed and kept it to themselves, and thought that by being discreet they would be able to avoid giving the believers any argument to use against them, they were wrong and very ignorant, for Allah knew what they concealed and what they disclosed, so He exposed their true nature to His slaves. # *And there are among them* that is, among the People of the Book *unlettered people* that is, common folk who are not knowledgeable *who have no knowledge of the Book, except wishful thinking* that is, they have no share of the Book of Allah except recitation that they hear; they know nothing about what the early generations had of true knowledge of it. All these people have is some speculative ideas and they blindly follow the scholars among them. #In these verses, Allah mentions their scholars, common folk, hypocrites and those among them who were not hypocrites. The scholars among them were adhering to their false and misguided religion, and the common folk were blindly following them, with no insight, so there was no hope that either of the two groups would believe in your message.
2|79|2:79. Then woe to those who write the scripture with their own hands, and then say: This is from Allah, in order to trade it for a small price! Woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they have earned thereby. # Here Allah is warning that those who distort the scriptures and say of the distortion and what they write: *This is from Allah*. In fact this is propagating falsehood and concealing truth. But they did that knowingly, *in order to trade it for a small price*. All of this world, from beginning to end, is a small price. They made their falsehood a means of snatching what is in people’s hands. Thus they wronged the people on two counts: they confused them with regard to their religion and they took their wealth unlawfully, by the worst of means, which is worse than those who take people’s wealth by force or by stealing and so on. Hence Allah warned them about these two things and said: *Woe to them for what their hands have written* of distortion and falsehood *and woe to them for what they have earned thereby* of wealth. What is meant by woe is severe punishment and loss. This is a stem warning indeed. #Shaykh al-Islam (Ibn Taymiyah) said, when discussing this passage *Do you [O believers] then hope... for what they have earned thereby* (vv. 75-79): *Allah condemned those who distorted words, and this includes those who explain or teach the Qur’an and Sunnah on the basis of innovation [bid‘ah].* # He also condemned those who have no knowledge of the Book except wishful thinking. This applies to those who do not ponder the meanings of the Qur’an and know nothing of it except mere recitation of its letters. It also applies to those who write anything with their hands that is contrary to the Book of Allah for the purpose of worldly gain, such as saying that this is from Allah, or this is Islam, or this is what the Qur’an and Sunnah say, or this is the understanding of the early generations and leading scholars, or this is one of the basic matters of religion that every individual and the entire Ummah must believe. It also applies to those who conceal what they know of the Qur’an and Sunnah so that the one who differs from him concerning the truth will not use his words as evidence against him. # These are matters that are very common among the followers of whims and desires in general, such as the Rafidis and also among many of those who claim to be scholars.
2|80-82|2:80. And they say: The fire will only touch us for a few days. Say: Have you received a covenant from Allah, for Allah will never break His covenant? Or are you saying about Allah things of which you have no real knowledge? # 2:81. Nay, those who do evil, and are encompassed by their sin will be the inhabitants of the fire; they will abide therein forever. # 2:82. But those who believe and do righteous deeds will be the inhabitants of paradise; they will abide therein forever. #Allah mentions their abhorrent actions, then states that despite that they praise themselves and are certain that they will be saved from the punishment of Allah and will be granted His reward, and that the fire will only touch them for a few days, which are so few that they may be counted on the fingers. Thus they combined evildoing with the feeling that they would be safe from the consequences thereof. # Because this was no more than a mere claim, Allah refuted them by saying: *Say* to them, O Messenger: *Have you received a covenant from Allah* whereby you have pledged to believe in Him and in His Messengers, and to obey Him? This is the covenant that would lead to salvation, a covenant that cannot be changed or altered. #*or are you saying about Allah things of which you have no real knowledge?*. Here Allah tells them that the truth of their claim is connected to one of these two matters, and there is no third option: either they have a covenant from Allah, in which case their claim is true, or they are saying something unfounded about Allah, in which case their claim is false. This exposes them to greater disgrace and a more severe punishment. It is known from their situation that they have no covenant from Allah, because they rejected many of the Prophets, to the extent that they killed a number of them. Because of their refusal to obey Allah and their breaking of covenants, there is only one possibility, which is that they are fabricators and liars who say about Allah what they do not know, and speaking of Allah without knowledge is one of the gravest and most abhorrent of forbidden actions. # Then Allah outlines a general ruling that is applicable to all, including the Children of Israel and others. This is the ruling and there is no other; there is no room for their wishful thinking and their claims as to who will be doomed and who will be saved. Allah says: *Nay*, the matter is not as you say, for your claim is unfounded. Rather *those who do evil*. This may include shirk (association of others with Allah) and lesser sins, but what is meant here is shirk, based on the fact that Allah then says *and are encompassed by their sin*. What is meant is that it encompasses the one who does it, leaving no way out. This is only applicable in the case of shirk, because the one who believes cannot be encompassed by his sin. # *will be the inhabitants of the fire; they will abide therein forever*. The Kharijites quote this verse as evidence that anyone who commits sin becomes a disbeliever. But this is proof against them, as you may see, because it clearly refers to shirk. This is the case with every follower of falsehood who quotes a verse or saheeh hadith to support his false notion; what he quotes as evidence will inevitably contain evidence against him. # *But those who believe* in Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers and the Last Day *and do righteous deeds* - deeds cannot be righteous unless they meet two conditions: they should be done sincerely for the sake of Allah and in accordance with the Sunnah of His Messenger. # To sum up the meaning of these two verses, those who will attain salvation and victory are those who believe and do righteous deeds; those who will be doomed to hell are those who associate others with Allah and disbelieve in Him.
2|83|2:83. And [remember] when We took a covenant from the Children of Israel [saying]: Do not worship anyone but Allah; show kindness to your parents and kindred, and to orphans and those in need; speak good words to people; establish prayer; and give zakah. Then you turned away, except a few of you, and paid no heed. # These teachings are among the basic principles of faith, which Allah has enjoined upon all nations because they contain that which is in the public interest at all times and in all places. So they are not subject to abrogation, because they are fundamental to the religion. Hence Allah enjoined them upon us when He said: *Worship Allah, and do not ascribe any partner to Him...* (an-Nisa’ 4: 36). # *And [remember] when We took a covenant from the Children of Israel*. That was because of their hard-heartedness; whatever command was enjoined upon them, they were reluctant to obey and would not do it unless they were made to give a solemn covenant and binding promises. # *[saying]: Do not worship anyone but Allah*. This is a command to worship Allah alone and a prohibition on associating anything with Him. This is the fundamental basis of Islam and no deeds are acceptable if they are not based on that. This is the right that Allah has over His slaves. # *show kindness to your parents* - this includes all types of kindness in word and deed, and implicitly forbids mistreating parents. What is obligatory is treating them kindly, and a command to do something implies prohibition of the opposite. # There are two opposites to kind treatment: mistreatment, which is the greater offence, and failing to show kindness without mistreatment, which is haram but is not as bad as the former. The same may be said with regard to upholding ties of kinship with relatives, orphans and the needy. Kindness may be defined but not quantified, as we shall see below. # Then Allah enjoined kindness towards people in general: *speak good words to people*. Speaking good words to people includes enjoining them to do good, forbidding them to do evil, teaching them (beneficial knowledge), greeting them with salam, smiling at them and so on. # As it is not possible for an individual to be kind to all people by monetary means, Allah has enjoined kindness that one may do to all others, namely kindness in words. That also implies that it is prohibited to say bad words to people, even the disbelievers. Hence Allah says: *Do not dispute with the People of the Book except in the most courteous manner...* (al- 'Ankabut 29: 46) # Part of the discipline and good manners that Allah has enjoined upon His slaves is that the individual should be dignified in his words and deeds, and not behave or speak in an indecent, offensive, insulting or argumentative manner. Rather he should have a good attitude, and be forbearing, easy-going with everyone, and patient in the face of any annoyance he encounters from people, in obedience to the command of Allah and in hope of attaining His reward. # Then Allah enjoined them to establish prayer and give zakah, because of what has been discussed above, namely that prayer is indicative of sincere devotion to Allah and zakah is indicative of kindness towards other people. # *Then* after these are good commands which, if one who has insight and wisdom ponders them, he will realise that Allah enjoined them upon His slaves out of kindness and mercy towards them, and He took a covenant from you, but *you turned away*, not caring at all about the matter. It may be that the one who turns away does so with the intention of coming back, but these people had no desire to come back to these commands. We seek refuge with Allah from misguidance. # *except a few of you*. This exception is noted, lest anyone think that all of them turned away; this tells us that Allah protected a few of them and made them steadfast.
2|84-86|2:84. And remember We took your covenant [saying]: Do not shed one another’s blood or drive one another from your homes, and you confirmed it, and you bear witness to that. # 2:85. Yet here you are, killing one another and driving a group of your own people out of their homes, helping their enemies against them, in sin and transgression; and if they come to you as captives, you ransom them, when it was forbidden for you to expel them in the first place! Do you believe only in part of the Book and deny another part of it? The punishment for those among you who do this will be nothing but disgrace in this world and on the Day of Resurrection they will be condemned to the harshest punishment. For Allah is not unaware of what you do. # 2:86. These are the people who buy the life of this world at the cost of the hereafter; their penalty will not be reduced nor will they be helped. # The deeds referred to in these verses are the deeds of those who lived in Madinah at the time of the revelation. Before the Prophet’s mission began, al-Aws and al-Khazraj - who became the Ansar - were polytheists who used to fight one another according to the customs of the jahiliyah (pre-Islamic period). Three Jewish tribes - Banu Ouravdhah. Banu an-Nadeer and Banu Qaynuqa1 - came and settled there, and each of these tribes became allies of a group of the people of Madinah. # When they fought, each Jew would help his ally against his opponents, who had the help of another Jewish group. So one Jew might kill another or expel him from his home, in the event of expulsion and plunder. Then, when the war ended and there were prisoners on both sides, they would ransom one another. # These three things were enjoined upon them: they were instructed not to shed one another’s blood or expel one another, and if there were prisoners from among them, it was an obligation upon them to ransom them. They did the latter, but did not fulfil the first two obligations. # Allah condemned them for that, and said: *Do you believe only in part of the Book* namely the ransom of prisoners *and deny another part of it?* namely (the prohibition on) killing and expelling one another. # This offers the strongest evidence that faith requires acting upon commands and heeding prohibitions, and that the deeds that are enjoined are part of faith. Allah says: *The punishment for those among you who do this will be nothing but disgrace in this world*, which indeed came to pass. Allah requited them and gave His Messenger power over them; he executed some of them, captured others and expelled some. #*and on the Day of Resurrection they will be condemned to the harshest* that is, the most severe *punishment. For Allah is not unaware of what you do*. Then Allah tells us the reason why they disbelieved in part of the Book and believed in other parts: *These are the people who buy the life of this world at the cost of the hereafter*. They thought that if they did not help their allies, that would be a source of shame. So they chose the flames over shame. Hence Allah says: *their penalty will not be reduced* rather it will remain severe and there will be no time of respite; *nor will they be helped* that is, no harm will be warded off from them.
2|87|2:87. We gave Moosa the Book and sent a succession of Messengers after him; We gave ‘Eesa the son of Maryam clear signs and supported him with the Pure Spirit. Is it that whenever there came to you a Messenger with something that was not in accordance with your desires, you became arrogant; some you disbelieved, and others you killed? # Here Allah reminds the Children of Israel that He sent Moosa to them and gave him the Torah; after him, He sent Messengers who ruled in accordance with the Torah, until He sent their final Prophet, ‘Eesa ibn Maryam, and gave him clear signs that would be sufficient proof for any human to believe in him. # *supported him with the Pure Spirit* that is, Allah strengthened him with the Pure Spirit. # The majority of commentators stated that this refers to Jibreel; others suggested that it refers to faith by means of which Allah supports His slaves. Yet, despite these blessings that cannot be quantified, when the Messengers came to you, *with something that was not in accordance with your desires, you became arrogant* that is, you were too arrogant to believe in them. # *some* of them *you disbelieved, and others you killed*, so you gave precedence to your whims and desires over guidance, and to this world over the hereafter. This is an obvious rebuke.
2|88|2:88. They say: Our hearts are impenetrably wrapped [against whatever you say]. Nay, Allah has cursed them for their disbelief; little is it they believe. # As their excuse for not believing that to which you, O Prophet, are calling them, they stated that their hearts are impenetrably wrapped. What is meant is that their hearts are covered over, so they do not understand what you say. In other words, they have an excuse - or so they say - for not understanding. But this is a lie on their part, hence Allah said: *Nay, Allah has cursed them for their disbelief* that is, they are cast away and cursed because of their disbelief and the believers among them are few, or they have little faith and it is their disbelief that is prevalent.
2|89-90|2:89. And now that there has come to them a Book from Allah, confirming what is with them - although in the past they used to pray for victory against those who disbelieved - when there comes to them that which they recognise as truth, they disbelieve in it; the curse of Allah is upon the disbelievers. # 2:90. How miserable is the price for which they have sold their souls, in that they reject that which Allah has sent down, out of resentment that Allah would send it down by His grace upon any of His slaves He chooses: Thus have they incurred wrath upon wrath. And for the disbelievers there will be a humiliating punishment. # That is, when a Book has come to them from Allah at the hands of the best of creation and the Seal of the Prophets, confirming that which is with them of the Torah, and they had prior knowledge of it and were certain of its coming - to the extent that if war broke out between them and the polytheists during the jahiliyah, they would speak of the victory they would achieve when this Prophet came, and warn them (the polytheists) about his imminent appearance and that they would fight the polytheists alongside him. But when this Book came to them, and the Prophet whom they recognised, they rejected him out of resentment and envy that Allah would send it down, by His grace, upon whomever He willed among His slaves. So Allah cursed them and was angry with them, wrath upon wrath, because their disbelief was so great and because they kept doubting and associating others with Allah. # *And for the disbelievers there will be a humiliating* that is, painful *punishments*, namely being thrown into hell and missing out on eternal bliss (in paradise). What a wretched situation they will be in, and what a bad deal they made when they gave up belief in Allah and in His Books and Messengers, and traded it for disbelief in Him and in His Books and Messengers, despite their knowledge and certainty. Thus their punishment will be more severe.
2|91-93|2:91. When it is said to them: Believe in that which Allah has revealed, they say: We believe in that which was revealed to us; yet they disbelieve in that which came after it, even though it is truth confirming that which is with them. Say: Why then did you kill the Prophets of Allah in the past, if you were indeed believers? # 2:92. Moosa came to you with clear signs, yet in his absence you took the calf [for worship] and thus became transgressors. # 2:93. And [remember] when We took a covenant from you and We raised the Mount above you, [saying]: Hold fast to that which We have given you and listen, they said: We hear and we disobey. And their hearts were filled with love of the calf, because of their disbelief. Say: How wretched is that which your faith commands you to do, if you are believers. # That is, when the Jews were commanded to believe in that which Allah had sent down to His Messenger namely the Qur’an, they were arrogant and refused, saying: *We believe in that which was revealed to us; yet they disbelieve in that which came after it* of other Books, even though what they should have done was believe in everything that Allah revealed, whether it was revealed to them or to others. That is beneficial faith, belief in what Allah has revealed to all the Messengers of Allah. # As for differentiating between the Messengers and the Books, claiming to believe in some but not others, this is not faith; rather it is the essence of disbelief. Hence Allah says: *Those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers, and want to make a distinction between [belief in] Allah and [belief in] His Messengers, and say: We believe in some and disbelieve in others and seek to adopt a way in between, it is they who are indeed disbelievers...* (an-Nisa’4: 150-151) # Hence Allah rebuked them emphatically here, with such a strong argument that they could not evade it. He responded to their disbelief in the Qur’an in two ways: He said *even though it is truth* - so if it is truth in all that it contains of stories, commands and prohibitions, and it is from their Lord, then disbelieving in it after that is disbelief in Allah and rejection of the truth that He sent down. # Then He said *confirming that which is with them* that is, in accordance with it in everything that is true and correct, and with final authority over them (previous scriptures). So why do you believe in that which was revealed to you, but you reject that which is equal to it? Can this be anything other than bias and following whims and desires instead of guidance? Moreover, if the Qur’an confirms that which is with them, this is proof for what they have of Books, and they have no way of proving (that their books were originally revealed from Allah) except through the Qur’an. So if they disbelieve in it and reject it, they become like one who made a claim on the basis of proof, and had no other basis for it; his claim cannot be accepted unless his proof is sound, then he examines his proof and argument, and finds them flawed so he rejects them. Is this not foolishness and insanity? Therefore their rejection of the Qur’an is akin to rejection of what they have in their own hands, and undermines it. #*And [remember] when We took a covenant from you and We raised the Mount above you, [saying]: Hold fast to that which We have given you and listen* that is, listen to it, accept it, obey and respond *they said: We hear and we disobey* that is, this is how they were. *And their hearts were filled with love of the calf* that is, love of the calf and love of worshipping it was instilled in their hearts, because of their disbelief. # *Say: How wretched is that which your faith commands you to do, if you are believers* that is, you claim to believe and boast about having the true religion, yet you killed the Prophets of Allah and took the calf as a god instead of Allah, when your Prophet Moosa was absent from you, and you did not accept his commands and prohibitions except after receiving threats and after the Mount was raised above you. Then you paid lip service to commitment, but your actions contradicted that. So what is this faith that you claim to have, and what is this religion? # If this is faith, as you claim, then how wretched is the faith that calls its followers to transgression, disbelief in the Messengers of Allah and great disobedience, when it is well known that true faith enjoins its followers to do all that is good and forbids them to do all that is evil. Thus their lies were highlighted and the contradiction (between their words and deeds) became evident.
2|94-96|2:94. Say: If the final abode with Allah is yours alone, to the exclusion of all others, then wish for death, if you are sincere. # 2:95. But they will never wish for death, because of what their own hands have sent on before them, and Allah is fully aware of the transgressors. # 2:96. You will surely find them, of all people, most greedy for life, even more than the polytheists. Each one of them wishes that he could be granted a life of a thousand years, but his being granted such a long life will not save him from punishment. For Allah sees well all that they do. # *Say* that is, tell them, by way of correcting their false claims *If the final abode with Allah* namely paradise *is yours alone, to the exclusion of all others*, as you claim that no one will enter paradise except those who are Jews or Christians, and that the fire of hell will only touch them for a few days (2: 80), so if you are telling the truth, *then wish for death*. This is a kind of challenge between them and the Messenger of Allah. # After having been cornered and pressured in response to their stubbornness, they are left with only one of two choices: either to believe in Allah and His Messenger, or to accept the challenge, which is to wish for death which will bring them to that abode that is exclusively theirs (according to their claim). But they refused to do that. # Thus it is established that they are in a state of extreme stubbornness and opposition to Allah and His Messenger, despite the fact that they are aware of what they are doing. Hence Allah said: *But they will never wish for death, because of what their own hands have sent on before them* of disbelief and sin; they are well aware that this is a path that will lead them to the requital for their evil deeds. Hence death was the most hateful of things to them and they were greedier for life than anyone else, even the polytheists who did not believe in any of the Messengers or Books. # Then Allah mentioned the intensity of their love for this world: *Each one of them wishes that he could be granted a life of a thousand years*. This highlights how eager they were to live, as they wished for something that is impossible. However, even if they were to live for that number of years, it would not avail them anything or ward off any of the punishment. # *For Allah sees well all that they do* - this is a threat to them of punishment for their deeds.
2|97-98|2:97. Say: Whoever is an enemy to Jibreel - for he brings down the [revelation] to your heart by Allah’s leave, a confirmation of what came before it, and guidance and glad tidings to the believers # 2:98. Whoever is an enemy to Allah and His angels and Messengers, to Jibreel and Meekal [Meeka’eel], then indeed, Allah is an enemy to the disbelievers. # That is, say to these Jews, who claim that what is preventing them from believing in you is the fact that your protector is Jibreel, and if it were anyone else among the angels of Allah, they would have believed in you, that this claim of yours is flawed and self-contradictory, and it is arrogance towards Allah. That is because Jibreel is the one who brought down the Qur’an to your heart from Allah, and he is the one who came down to the Prophets before you; he is the one whom Allah commanded and sent to do that. Hence he is primarily a Messenger. Furthermore, this Book that Jibreel brought down confirms the scriptures that came before it, and does not differ from them or contradict them; it contains complete guidance away from all types of misguidance, and glad tidings of good in this world and in the hereafter for those who believe in it. Hence enmity towards Jibreel, who is described thus, constitutes disbelief in Allah and His signs, and it is enmity towards Allah and towards His Messengers and angels. Their enmity towards Jibreel was not because of who he is; rather it was because of what he brought down of the truth from Allah to the Messengers of Allah. Hence that enmity implies disbelief in and enmity towards the One Who sent him, the message with which he was sent and the one to whom he was sent.
2|99|2:99. We have sent down to you clear signs; and none reject them but the evildoers. # Here Allah says to His Prophet ﷺ: *We have sent down to you clear signs*, by means of which the one who seeks guidance will find it, and so as to establish proof against those who stubbornly refuse (to follow guidance). This is such clear guidance to the truth that no one could refuse to accept but an evildoer who rebels against the command of Allah, refuses to obey Him and is extremely arrogant.
2|100|2:100. Is it not so that every time they make a covenant, some of them cast it aside? In fact, most of them do not believe. # This is an expression of astonishment at how often they made covenants but did not have the patience to fulfil them. The phrase *every time* is indicative of something that happened repeatedly. Every time they made a covenant, the outcome was that they broke it. What was the reason for that? The reason was that most of them did not believe, and it is their lack of faith that caused them to break the covenants. If they had been sincere in faith, they would have been like those of whom Allah says: *Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with Allah...* (al-Ahzab 33: 23)
3|1-6|3:1. Alif. Lam. Meem. # 3:2. Allah: there is no god but He, the Ever-Living, the SelfSustaining and All-Sustaining. # 3:3. He has sent down to you the Book in truth, confirming what came before it; and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel # 3:4. before this, as a guide to humankind, and He sent down the criterion [between right and wrong]. Then those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah will suffer a severe punishment, and Allah is Almighty, an Avenger. # 3:5. From Allah, verily nothing is hidden on earth or in the heavens. # 3:6. He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He wills. There is no god but He, the Almighty, the Most Wise. # Allah begins this soorah by telling us of His divinity and that He is God and there is no god but He; no devotion or worship should be directed to anyone but Him. Everything other than Him that is worshipped is false; Allah is the true God Who has the divine attributes that are inherently implied in these two names. The EverLiving is the One Who has life in the most perfect sense, which implies all attributes without which life cannot be complete or perfect, such as hearing, seeing, power, strength, greatness, eternal life, and unsurpassable might. The Self-Sustaining and All-Sustaining is the One Who sustains Himself and has no need of any of His creation, and the One Who sustains all others. All created beings need Him to be brought into existence, to be formed and shaped, and to be sustained. He is the One Who controls the affairs of all creatures, body, mind and soul. One aspect of His sustaining and caring for His slaves and showing mercy towards them is that He sent down to His Messenger Muhammad ﷺ the Book, which is the greatest and holiest of the Books, containing truth in its stories, commands and prohibitions. What He says is truth and what He ordains is justice. He sent it down in truth so that people would worship their Lord and leam His Book. # *confirming what came before it* of the previous books. So it is a judge over them; what it confirms is to be accepted and what it refutes is to be rejected. What you find in the Qur’an of rulings that all previous Messengers agreed upon you will find in other books too, and these (previous books) testify that the Qur’an is truly from Allah. But the People of the Book cannot truly believe in their books if they do not believe in the Qur’an; their disbelief in it undermines their belief in their own books. # Then Allah says: *and He sent down the Torah* to Moosa *and the Gospel* to ‘Eesa *before this* that is, before the sending down of the Qur’an *as a guide to humankind*. The apparent meaning of this phrase is that it refers to everything mentioned previously, that is, Allah sent down the Qur’an, the Torah and the Gospel as a guide to humankind to steer them away from misguidance, so whoever accepts the guidance of Allah is guided, and whoever does not accept it will remain misguided, *and He sent down the criterion [between right and wrong]* that is, definitive arguments, proof and evidence that point to the right path. Thus Allah explains what people need to know, so that the rulings will remain clear and no one will have any excuse or argument for not believing in Allah and His revelations. Hence He says: *Then those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah* that is, after He has explained them, and made them clear and removed any ambiguity *will suffer a severe punishment* that no one can imagine how severe it is or comprehend its nature. # *and Allah is Almighty* that is, powerful, and nothing is beyond Him *an Avenger* against those who disobey Him. # *From Allah, verily nothing is hidden on earth or in the heavens*. This is an affirmation that His knowledge encompasses all things, manifest and hidden, visible and invisible, including the foetus in the womb that cannot be seen by other created beings, and of which they have no knowledge at the time when He is caring for it in the best manner and it is developing according to His decree. Hence He says: *He it is Who shapes you in the wombs as He wills*, complete or incomplete, beautiful or ugly, male or female. # *the Almighty, the Most Wise*. # These verses affirm the divinity of Allah and that it is His alone, and they declare false the divinity of anything other than Him. This is a refutation of the Christians who claimed that ‘Eesa ibn Maryam was divine. The verses also affirm the perfect life of Allah, Who is self-sustaining and sustains others completely. These two attributes (divinity and perfect life) imply all the other divine attributes, as discussed above. These verses also affirm the great scriptures and tell us that they were a mercy and guidance for people; hence people are divided into those who are guided and those who are not, and those who do not follow the guidance (of these scriptures) will be punished. There is also affirmation of the vastness of Allah’s knowledge, and that His will and wisdom always come to pass. 
3|7-9|3:7. It is He Who has sent down to you the Book. In it are definitive verses, which are the foundation of the Book; others are ambiguous, but those in whose hearts is deviation follow the part thereof that is ambiguous, seeking [to cause] confusion, and seeking an interpretation [that suits them]. But no one knows its [true] interpretation except Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in knowledge say: We believe in [the Book]; all of it is from our Lord. None will pay heed except people of understanding. # 3:8. Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate now after You have guided us, and bestow upon us mercy from Yourself; for You are the Bestower. # 3:9. Our Lord, You will gather all people on the day of which there is no doubt; for Allah does not break His promise. # The entire Qur’an is definitive, as Allah says: *...This is a Book, the verses of which are perfected, then explained in detail, from One Who is Most Wise, All-Aware.* (Hud 11:1). It is precise, based on clarity, justice and perfection. *...But who could be better in judgement than Allah, for a people who are certain in faith?* (al-Ma’idah 5:50) #All of it is similar in beauty and eloquence, with some parts confirming others and with similarities in terms of wording and meaning. With regard to the definitive clarity and ambiguity mentioned in this verse, Allah says, in reference to the Qur’an: *In it are definitive verses* that is, their meaning is clear and there is no ambiguity or confusion. # *which are the foundation of the Book* that is, they form the basic reference point in the light of which any ambiguous verse is to be understood, and they form the greater part of the Book. # *others are ambiguous* that is, the meaning may not be clear to many people, because the wording is very general, or they may be misunderstood by some. To sum up, some of the verses are clear to everyone, and they are the majority that form the reference point for others; and there are other verses which may be unclear to some people. In that case what they must do is refer that which is ambiguous to that which is definitive, and that which is unclear to that which is clear. In that way, one will find that some parts of the Book confirm others and there will be no contradiction or conflict in meaning. But people are divided into two groups: # *but those in whose hearts is deviation* that is, an inclination away from righteousness because of corrupt motives; their aim is to follow misguidance. Their hearts have deviated from the path of guidance, *follow the part thereof that is ambiguous* that is, they forsake what is definitive and clear, and go to that which is ambiguous. Thus they approach the matter backwards, trying to interpret that which is definitive in the light of what they want to understand from the ambiguous verses, which results in confusion. # *seeking [to cause] confusion* to those whom they call to follow them, because that which is ambiguous may be interpreted in such a way as to cause confusion due to its ambiguous nature. However, that which is clear and definitive cannot be a cause of confusion, because the true meaning is clear to anyone who seeks to follow the truth, *and seeking an interpretation [that suits them]. But no one knows its [true] interpretation except Allah*. There are two opinions among the commentators as to whether the sentence ends with the word *Allah*. The majority are of the view that it does end there; others are of the view that it continues, so that what is meant is, “But no one knows its [true] interpretation except Allah and those who are firmly grounded in knowledge.” Both meanings are possible. If interpretation is aimed at finding out the truth about the matter and its real nature, then the correct opinion is to stop at the phrase *except Allah*, because Allah has kept knowledge of the true meaning of the ambiguous verses to Himself, as in the case of the exact nature of the attributes of Allah and how they are, and the exact nature of the events that will occur on the Last Day, and so on. These are matters the true nature of which is known only to Allah. It is not permissible to try to understand the nature of these things, because that is something that cannot be known. Imam Malik (may Allah have mercy on him) was asked about the verse: *The Most Gracious rose over the Throne [in a manner that befits His Majesty].* (Ta Ha 20:5). *The questioner said: How did He rise over it? Imam Malik said: The rising over is known (in linguistic terms), how (with regard to Allah) is not known, belief in it is obligatory, and asking about its nature is an innovation (bid‘ah).* # Something similar may be said concerning all the divine attributes to one who asks how they are; he should be told something similar to what Imam Malik said: that the attribute is known, but how it is, is not known; believing in it is obligatory and asking about its nature is an innovation. Allah has told us of it but He has not told us how it is. So we must be content with the limit that He has set for us. But those who have devious inclinations seek out these ambiguous and unclear matters and seek to discuss that which does not concern them; they put effort into trying to understand that which we cannot comprehend, because no one knows it except Allah. Those who are firmly grounded in knowledge believe in it, but they leave the meaning to Allah; they leave it to Him and thus are safe. However, if what is meant by interpretation is explanation and clarification, then the correct view is to connect *those who are firmly grounded in knowledge* to *Allah*. Thus we may understand that interpreting that which is ambiguous in the light of that which is definitive, and removing the ambiguity, is a process that no one knows except Allah and those who are well grounded in knowledge. Hence they believe in it and refer it to the definitive texts and say: *all of it*, both the definitive and ambiguous texts *is from our Lord*, and there can be no contradiction in that which is from Him; rather it is harmonious, and some parts of it confirm and support one another. This points to an important major principle, which is that if they know that all of it is from Allah, and they are not sure about the exact meaning of an ambiguous verse, they know for certain that it is to be referred to the definitive verses, even if they do not know how to go about doing that. As Allah encourages people to submit to Him and believe in His rulings, and He has warned against following that which is ambiguous, He says: *None will pay heed* that is, no one will understand the admonition of Allah and accept His advice and teachings except *people of understanding* that is, people of sound reasoning, who are the best of people and the elite among the sons of Adam. The admonition reaches their minds, so they pay attention to what will benefit them and they do it, and they take note of what will harm them and they avoid it. But in the case of others, they are like dross in which there is no benefit and which produces nothing. No rebuke or reminder will benefit them because they are devoid of reason. # Then Allah tells us about those who are firmly grounded in knowledge: they call upon Him and say: *Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate now after You have guided us* that is, do not cause our hearts to incline away from the truth out of ignorance or stubbornness on our part; rather cause us to follow the straight path, to be guided and to guide others; make us steadfast in adhering to Your guidance and keep us safe from that which those who deviate suffer *and bestow upon us mercy from Yourself* that is, grant mercy by means of which You guide us to that which will help us to do good and will protect us from evil t(for You are the Bestower)? that is, You give in abundance and are very kind; Your generosity reaches all created beings. # *Our Lord, You will gather all people on the day of which there is no doubt; for Allah does not break His promise*. He will requite them for their deeds, both good and bad. Allah praises those who are firmly grounded in knowledge for having seven attributes, which are the key to happiness. They are: # 1 - Knowledge which is the way to reach Allah, for it explains His rulings and laws. # 2- Deep knowledge, which does not refer to merely having some knowledge. Rather the one who has deep knowledge is the scholarly person who has certain knowledge and practises precise scholarship. Allah has taught him the apparent and hidden meanings (with regard to the rulings and so on). He is deeply immersed in the wisdom of Sharia in terms of knowing, shaping his character and acting upon it. # 3- Allah describes such people as believers in His Book in its entirety, for they refer that which is ambiguous to that which is definitive. *We believe in [the Book]; all of it is from our Lord*. # 4- They ask Allah for well-being and protection from that which those who deviate suffer. # 5- They acknowledge the blessings of Allah for having bestowed guidance upon them, as they say: *Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate now after You have guided us*. # 6- Nevertheless, they ask Him for His mercy which leads to all that is good and wards off all that is evil. They seek His mercy by virtue of His name the Bestower (al-Wahhab). # 7- Allah tells us of their faith and certainty in the Day of Resurrection, and their fear of Him. This is what should motivate them to strive to protect themselves from falling into error.
3|10-13|3:10. As for those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their children will avail them at all against Allah; it is they who will be fuel for the fire. # 3:11. as was the case with the people of Pharaoh and those who came before them. They rejected Our signs, and Allah seized them because of their sins. For Allah is severe in punishment. # 3:12. Say to the disbelievers: You will be defeated and driven together to hell - what a wretched resting-place. # 3:13. There has already been for you a sign in the two groups that met [in combat]: one was fighting in the cause of Allah, the other disbelieving [in Allah]; they saw them with their own eyes twice their number. But Allah supports with His help whomever He wills. In this is a lesson for those who have insight. # Here Allah tells us that those who disbelieve in Him and His Messengers, and reject His religion and His Book, are deserving of punishment, and indeed the most severe punishment, for their disbelief and their sins; their wealth and their children will not avail them at all, even though in this world they may be useful in warding off some of these calamities that may befall them. They say: *...We are more abundant in wealth and children, and we are not going to be punished.* (Saba’ 34:35) - but on the Day of Resurrection there will appear to them from Allah that which they had not reckoned on. # *The evil consequences of what they have earned will become apparent to them, and the very thing [punishment] they used to ridicule will overwhelm them.* (az-Zumar 39:48) # Children and wealth will have no value before Allah; rather what will benefit a person will be his faith in Allah and his righteous deeds, as Allah says: *It is not your wealth or your children that bring you nearer to Us; but those who believe and do righteous deeds - it is they who will have a multiple reward for their deeds, and they will dwell secure in the high places in paradise.* (Saba' 34:37) # Here Allah tells us that the disbelievers are the fuel of hellfire, and they are the ones who will remain therein forever. That is the situation in which Allah says that no wealth or children will avail the disbelievers at all. This is the way in which Allah dealt with previous nations, as happened to Pharaoh, those who came before him and those who came after him of transgressors and tyrants, who had much wealth and many troops under their control, when they disbelieved in the signs of Allah and stubbornly denied the m essage that the Messengers brought. Allah seized them because of their sins, on the basis of justice on His part, not injustice. Allah punishes severely those who do that which incurs the punishment, namely disbelief and sins of various types and degrees of severity. # *Say* O Muhammad *to the disbelievers: You will be defeated and driven together to hell - what a wretched resting-place*. This indicates that the believers will prevail; it is also a warning to the disbelievers. And it came to pass as Allah foretold; He granted victory to the believers over their enemies, the disbelievers among the polytheists, Jews and Christians, and He will continue to do this for His believing slaves and troops until the Day of Resurrection. In this there is a lesson; it is one of the visible miracles of the Qur’an. Allah tells us that in addition to being defeated in this world, the disbelievers will also be gathered on the Day of Resurrection in the abode of perdition. This is what they have brought upon themselves, and what a wretched resting-place and bad recompense will be theirs. # *There has already been for you a sign* that is, a great lesson *in the two groups that met [in combat]* on the day of Badr *one was fighting in the cause of Allah* namely the Messenger and his Companions. *the other disbelieving [in Allah]* namely the disbelievers of Quraysh who came out of their homes in insolence and arrogance, aiming to show off and to bar people from the path of Allah. Allah brought the two groups together at Badr, and the polytheists were many times greater in number than the believers. Hence Allah says: *they saw them with their own eyes twice their number* that is, the believers saw that the disbelievers were much more numerous than them, double their number or more; this is confirmed by the words *with their own eyes*. But Allah helped and supported the believers, so they defeated (the enemy), killed their leaders and captured many of them. That only came about because Allah supports those who support His cause and humiliates those who disbelieve in Him. In this there is a lesson for those who have insight and sound reasoning, that the group that prevails is in the right and the other group is in the wrong; otherwise if one only examines and compares the number and arms of the two sides as they appear to be, he will be certain that it is impossible for this small group to prevail over this large group. But in addition to these visible means, there are greater means that lie beyond them and cannot be comprehended except by people of insight, who believe in Allah, put their trust in Him and have the confidence that He will suffice. Those greater means are His help and support that He gives to His believing slaves against His disbelieving enemies. 
3|14-17|3:14. Fair-seeming to men is the love of pleasures, such as women and sons, heaped-up hoards of gold and silver, fine horses, and livestock and well-tilled land. These are the enjoyments of the life of this world; but with Allah is the best place to return to. # 3:15. Say: Shall I tell you of something better than that? For those who are pious, there are gardens with their Lord, through which rivers flow, where they will abide forever, with pure spouses and the good pleasure of Allah. Allah is fully aware of His slaves, # 3:16. those who say: Our Lord! We have indeed believed; forgive us, then, our sins, and protect us from the punishment of the fire: # 3:17. Those who are patient, those who are truthful, those who are truly devout, those who are charitable, those who pray for forgiveness before dawn. # Here Allah tells us that love of worldly pleasures has been made fair-seeming to people. The things mentioned are singled out because they are the greatest pleasures in this world, and others are secondary to them. Allah says: *Verily, We have made all that is on earth as an adornment for it...* (al-Kahf 18:7) # As the things mentioned have been made fair-seeming to them, because of the excitement they generate, people become attached to them and their hearts become inclined to them, therefore they were divided into two groups according to their attitude towards these things. One group made pursuit of these things their main aim, thus it became the focal point of their thoughts, ideas and actions both visible and hidden, and it distracted them from the purpose for which they were created; they became like grazing animals, enjoying these pleasures and indulging their desires, not caring in what manner they acquired these things or disposed of them. For these people, these things became a cause of their ending up in the realm of suffering and torment. The second group understood the purpose of these things and realised that Allah has made them as a test and a trial for His slaves, so that it may be known who will give precedence to obeying and pleasing Him over his own pleasures and desires. In this case, they have made it a means of attaining success in the hereafter, and they enjoy what they enjoy in a manner that helps them to obey Him. Physically they are dealing with these things but their focus of mind is on something else. They understand that these things are as Allah says: *the enjoyments of the life of this world*, so they take them as a means of reaching the hereafter and their hasanat (righteous deeds) increase thereby, thus giving them provision to help them in their journey towards their Lord. #This verse offers consolation to the poor who cannot afford these pleasures that the rich can afford. It is also a warning to those who are deceived by them and get carried away, and it discourages people of intelligence from pursuing them. This is followed by mention of the permanent abode and ultimate destination of the pious and righteous; Allah tells us that it is better than what is mentioned here, because in it there are lofty gardens with elegant dwellings and high chambers, various kinds of trees bearing all kinds of fruit, flowing rivers that will go wherever they want, and pure spouses who are free of any dirt, impurity or faults, visible or hidden; they will abide therein forever, thus their joy will be complete. Moreover, they will attain the pleasure of Allah which is the greatest blessing. Compare this sublime abode with the ignoble realm, then choose for yourself which is better. # *Allah is fully aware of His slaves* that is, He knows what they have of good qualities and bad qualities, and what is best suited to their condition, so He helps whomever He wills among them and He leaves whomever He wills to his own devices. # Allah describes paradise perfectly, and He describes those who deserve it, namely those who fear Him by doing what He has enjoined and refraining from what He has forbidden. Part of their supplication is: *Our Lord! We have indeed believed; forgive us, then, our sins, and protect us from the punishment of the fire*. They seek to draw closer to Allah by virtue of His favour upon them, as He guided them to believe, and they beseech Him to forgive them for their sins and to protect them from the evil consequences thereof, which is the punishment of the fire. Then He discusses further the nature of their piety or fear of Him: *Those who are patient* that is, they are steadfast in doing that which Allah loves of acts of obedience, and in refraining from disobedience towards Him; they bear with patience the divine decrees that cause them pain *those who are truthful* that is, sincere in faith and truthful in all they do and say *those who are charitable* and spend from that which Allah has provided to them on various causes to help the needy among their relatives and others *those who pray for forgiveness before dawn*. Among their praiseworthy characteristics is their thinking little of themselves; they do not regard themselves as good enough or as being of any status; rather they regard themselves as sinners who fall short, so they seek forgiveness from their Lord and look for the times when supplications are more likely to be answered, such as the time before dawn. # Al-Hasan said, “They extended their (night) prayers until dawn, then they sat asking their Lord for forgiveness.” # This passage speaks of how people are inclined towards the life of this world, then points out that it is nothing more than conveniences that will soon come to an end; this is followed by a description of paradise which is filled with delights. Thus the contrast between this world and the hereafter, and the superiority of the hereafter over this world, is highlighted, in order to point out that people should give precedence to the hereafter and strive for it. The people of paradise are described as pious, then the characteristics of piety are outlined so that one may measure oneself against that and see whether he is one of the people of paradise or not. 
3|18-20|3:18. Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, as do His angels and people of knowledge; He is the upholder of justice. There is no god but He, the Almighty, the Most Wise. # 3:19. Verily the true religion in the sight of Allah is Islam. Those who were given the scripture did not differ except after knowledge had come to them, out of mutual envy and rivalry. But if any disbelieve in the revelations of Allah, then Allah is swift in reckoning. # 3:20. So if they dispute with you, say: I have submitted my whole self to Allah and so have those who follow me. And say to those who were given the scripture and to the unlettered: Do you [also] submit yourselves? If they do, then they are rightly guided, but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the message. Allah is fully aware of His slaves. # This is an affirmation from Allah of His oneness (tawheed) in the strongest terms, because it is the testimony of Allah Himself and of the best of His creation, namely the angels and the people of knowledge. The testimony of Allah is based on definitive proof and evidence that point to His being one and that there is no God but He; the type of evidence that is found in the universe and in people’s own creation points to this great principle (that there is only one God). If there was no evidence other than the fact that no one affirms His oneness but Allah supports him against the polytheists who deny His oneness, His great grace in that there is no blessing that people enjoy but it is from Him, the fact that no one could ward off harm except Him, and that all people are unable to bring benefits or cause harm to themselves or others - then this would be definitive proof of the oneness of Allah and the invalidity of associating others with Him. As for the testimony of the angels to that effect, we leam it from what Allah has told us about it and what His Messengers have told us. As for the testimony of the people of knowledge, that is because they are the reference point to be consulted in all religious matters, especially the most important, greatest and noblest matter, namely affirming the oneness of Allah (tawheed). All of them, from the first one to the last, agreed on that, called people to it and showed them the way that leads to it. So people are obliged to adhere to this matter (tawheed), concerning which testimony was given, and to act upon it. This indicates that the noblest of matters is knowledge of tawheed, because Allah has testified to it Him self and the best of His creation have also testified to it; testimony can only be based on knowledge and certainty. This indicates that whoever has not reached that level in knowledge of tawheed is not one of the people of knowledge. # This verse highlights the importance of knowledge from many angles, such as the following: # - Allah singled them (the people of knowledge) out for the honour of testifying to the most important matter to which anyone may testify (namely tawheed). # - Allah mentioned their testimony alongside His own and that of the angels, which is sufficient honour. # - He describes them as people of knowledge, as they are the ones who are carrying this knowledge. # - He describes them as witnesses and proof against people, and made it binding upon people to adhere to the matter that was witnessed; thus Allah made them the cause of people adhering to belief in His oneness, so whoever follows that, the scholars will get part of the reward for it. This is the bounty of Allah that He bestows upon whomever He will. # - The fact that He includes the people of knowledge among the witnesses implies that they are praiseworthy and of good character, and that they are trustworthy and able to take care of that which He entrusted to them (namely affirmation of His oneness). As He affirmed His oneness, He also affirmed His justice and said: *He is the upholder of justice* that is, He is always just and fair in all His actions and in the disposal of His slaves’ affairs. He is indeed on a straight path in what He enjoins and forbids, and what He creates and decrees. Then He reiterates the affirmation of His oneness: *There is no god but He, the Almighty, the Most Wise*. # It should be noted that this principle, which is affirmation of the oneness of Allah and worshipping Him alone, is supported by textual evidence and by rational evidence, thus it becomes clearer than daylight to those who have deep insight. # With regard to textual evidence, everything in the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger that enjoins and affirms belief in His oneness, and speaks of loving those who believe in it and hating those who do not believe in it, punishing them (the disbelievers), and condemns polytheism and those who believe in it, comes under the heading of textual evidence; almost the entire Qur’an affirms that. With regard to rational evidence, that may be understood just by thinking, contemplating and pondering, the Qur’an refers to that and points out much of this evidence. # One of the most important principles is acknowledging the Lordship (ruboobiyah) of Allah. The one who realises that He is the Creator, Provider and Controller of all things will reach the conclusion that He is the only One Who is to be worshipped, and worship should be directed only to Him. As this is the clearest and most important of matters, Allah reiterates this evidence frequently in His Book. Another example of rational evidence that Allah is the only One to be worshipped, to the exclusion of all others, is that He alone bestows blessings and wards off harm. The one who realises that blessings, both apparent and hidden, great and small, come from Allah and that there is no harm, hardship or distress but He is the only One Who can ward it off, and that no one in creation has the power to bring benefit to or ward off harm from himself, let alone anyone else, will reach the certain conclusion that worshipping anything other than Allah is the falsest of falsehood and that worship should only be for the only One Who can bring benefits and ward off harm. Hence Allah often highlights this point in His Book. A further example of rational evidence to that effect is what Allah has told us about other deities that were worshipped instead of Him: they have no power to bring benefit or cause harm; they cannot help anyone else or even help themselves; they have no power of hearing and seeing; even if it is assumed that they can hear, it would avail them nothing; and they have other attributes which are indicative of their utter imperfection. What Allah has told us about Himself, of His majestic attributes, sublime actions, might, power and other attributes may be known from textual and rational evidence. The one who truly knows that knows that it is not befitting or appropriate to worship any but the Almighty Lord to Whom belong all perfection, all glory, all praise, all might and all pride; it is not befitting to worship created beings that are subject to control, imperfect, deaf and dumb, and have no understanding. # Further rational evidence to that effect is found in what people see with their own eyes in the past and at present of how Allah honours those who affirm His oneness, and humiliates and punishes those who associate others with Him. That is because Allah has made affirming His oneness a means of attaining all that is good and warding off all that is harmful in both spiritual and worldly terms. He has made associating others with Him and disbelief a means of incurring punishment in both spiritual and worldly terms. Hence when He mentions the stories of the Messengers and their interactions with nations who were obedient or disobedient, and He tells us about the punishment of the disobedient and the salvation of the Messengers and those who followed them, after each story He says: *...Surely, in that there is a sign...* (al-Baqarah 2:248) - that is, a lesson that may be understood by those who reflect, for they will understand that belief in His oneness is the only way to attain salvation, and failure to do that leads to doom. This is the main rational and textual evidence that points to this important principle. Allah mentions it a great deal in His Book in various ways, so that the one who chooses faith will do so on the basis of clear evidence, and the one who chooses disbelief would do so despite the evidence that had been made clear to him. To Allah be all praise and thanks. # Then He affirms that He is the True God Who deserves to be worshipped, and He explains the religion through which people should worship Him and submit to Him; that is Islam, which is submission to Allah by declaring His oneness and obeying Him. This is the religion to which His Messengers called people and which is prescribed in His Books. No other religion is accepted from anyone. It is the religion that is based on sincerity towards Him in terms of love, fear, hope, turning to Him, beseeching Him and following His Messenger in all of that. This is the religion of all the Messengers; anyone who follows them is on their path. The People of the Book only differed after their Books had come to them, urging them to unite in following the religion of Allah, but they only differed out of enmity, envy and rivalry amongst themselves. Otherwise there had come to them the greatest reason that should have motivated them to follow the truth and give up dissent. This was the result of their disbelief, hence Allah said: *Those who were given the scripture did not differ except after knowledge had come to them, out of mutual envy and rivalry. But if any disbelieve in the revelations of Allah, then Allah is swift in reckoning*. Allah will requite each person for his deeds, especially those who abandon the truth after having come to know it. Such a one deserves the stem warning and the painful punishment. # Then Allah commanded His Messenger, when debating with the Christians and others who preferred a religion other than Islam, to say to them: *I have submitted my whole self to Allah and so have those who follow me* that is, I and those who followed me have affirmed and testified and submitted our own selves to our Lord; we have forsaken any religion other than the religion of Islam and we are certain that they (other religions) are false. This is aimed at making them lose hope of winning you over to their religion and reinforcing your beliefs when you come across specious arguments. It also offers proof to the one who is confused, because, as stated above, Allah referred to the testimony of the people of knowledge among His slaves to His oneness, so that they may provide evidence against others. The leader of the people of knowledge, the best of them and the most knowledgeable is our Prophet Muhammad ﷺ, then after him come his followers of different levels. They are possessed of sound knowledge and mature thinking that is unmatched by anyone else; no one else even comes close to it. Once the oneness of Allah and His religion, to which the best and most knowledgeable of creation (the Prophet) devoted himself, are proven on the basis of clear evidence, certainty will be attained and all doubts and uncertainty will be dispelled, and one will realise that all other religions are false. Hence Allah says: *And say to those who were given the scripture*, namely the Christians and the Jews *and to the unlettered* namely the polytheists among the Arabs and others: *Do you [also] submit yourselves? If they do* that is, if they believe the same as you believe, *then they are rightly guided* as you are rightly guided, and they become your brothers with the same rights and duties as you have. *but if they turn away* from Islam, and are content with other religions, *your duty is only to convey the message* and your reward is due from your Lord. Proof has been established against them and there is nothing left after that but the requital of punishment for their sins. Hence Allah says: *Allah is fully aware of His slaves*.
3|21-22|3:21. As to those who reject the revelations of Allah and unjustifiably slay the Prophets, and slay those of humankind who enjoin justice among the people, give them the tidings of a painful punishment. # 3:22. They are those whose deeds will come to nothing in this world or in the hereafter and they will have no helpers. # These are the ones of whom Allah tells us, in this verse, that they are the worst of people in terms of sin, and what sin can be worse than rejecting the revelations of Allah which are definitive proof of the truth? Those who reject them are the worst in terms of d isbelief and stubbornness; they killed the Prophets of Allah who have the greatest rights over people after Allah, for Allah enjoined that they should be obeyed, believed, respected, honoured and supported. But these people did the opposite of that; they also killed those w ho enjoined justice upon people, which is enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil, which in fact is kindness and sincerity to the ones to whom this advice is addressed. But they responded in the worst manner, and thus they deserve the worst punishment for this evil offence; that is the most indescribably painful and severe punishment, one that hurts bodies, hearts and souls. Moreover, their deeds are rendered invalid because of what their hands have earned and they will have no one to help them against the punishment of Allah or to ward off His wrath and punishment in the slightest. Rather, they will lose hope of all good, and everything that is evil or harmful will befall them. This applies to the Jews and others like them, whom Allah has cursed for their audacity against Allah, His Prophets and His righteous slaves.
3|23-25|3:23. Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of the Book? They are invited to the Book of Allah, so it may judge between them, but a group of them turn away in aversion. # 3:24. That is because they say: The fire will only touch us for a few days. Thus the lies they fabricated have deceived them with regard to their own religion. # 3:25. But how [will they fare] when We gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt, and each soul will be paid in full for what it has earned, and none will be wronged? # Here Allah tells us about the People of the Book whom Allah blessed with His Book. It was incumbent upon them to be those who most closely adhered to it and were quickest to submit to its rulings. But, Allah tells us, when they are called to comply with the ruling of the Book, some of them turn away in aversion; they turn away physically and mentally. That is the utmost criticism which contains an implicit warning to us, lest we do what they did, in which case we would be subject to the same criticism and punishment. Rather what is required of everyone, if he is called to the Book of Allah, is to hear and obey, and submit, as Allah says: *The only response of the believers, when they are called to Allah and His Messenger so that he may judge between them, is to say: We hear and we obey...* (an-Nur 24:51) # The reason why the People of the Book were deceived into such audacity in disobeying Allah is that they said: *The fire will only touch us for a few days. Thus the lies they fabricated have deceived them with regard to their own religion*. They fabricated these words and thought that they were true, so they based their actions on that and did not refrain from falling into sin, because they had developed wishful thinking; they were deceived by thinking that their ultimate destiny was paradise, but they were lying for that was no more than lies and fabrications. Rather their ultimate destiny is the worst of destinies, and the consequences of their actions will be extremely severe. Hence Allah says: *But how [will they fare] when We gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt* that is, how will they be when they are faced with the evil consequences of their deeds on that day? Their situation will be indescribably and unimaginably awful, because that day is the day when all people will be paid in full for what they earned; the requital will be on the basis of justice, not injustice. It is already established that the requital will be in accordance with the deeds. We have seen above that some of their deeds indicate that they will be among those who are most severely punished.
3|26-27|3:26. Say: O Allah, Lord of all dominion, You grant dominion to whomever You will, and You take away dominion from whomever You will; You grant honour to whomever You will, and You humiliate whomever You will. In Your Hand is all good. Verily, You have power over all things. # 3:27. You cause the night to encroach upon the day, and the day to encroach upon the night; You bring forth the living from the dead, and You bring forth the dead from the living; and You grant provision to whomever You will without measure. # Here Allah says to His Prophet ﷺ: *Say: O Allah, Lord of all dominion* that is, You are the Sovereign, the Lord of all realms; absolute possession and control is only for You; all realms, in heaven and on earth, are Yours and all control is Yours. Then Allah highlights some of the ways in which He alone controls all affairs, as He says: *You grant dominion to whomever You will, and You take away dominion from whomever You will*. This indicated that Allah would take away dominion from Caesar and Chosroes and those who followed them, and would give it to the Ummah of Muhammad ﷺ - And Allah did indeed do that, to Him be praise. Dominion may be granted or taken away in accordance with the will of Allah. This does not contradict the laws of cause and effect, whether in universal or religious terms, that what Allah has decreed should be the means of attaining, keeping or losing dominion. All of that is connected to the will of Allah, and there is no cause or measure that can lead independently to the effect; rather all causes are connected to the divine will and decree. # Among the causes that Allah has decreed should be means of attaining dominion are faith and righteous deeds, unity among the Muslims, preparing whatever weapons can be acquired, being patient and avoiding division. Allah says: *Allah has promised those among you who believe and do righteous deeds that He will surely make them successors [to power] in the land, as He made those before them successors...* (an-Nur 24:55) # Thus Allah tells us that faith and righteous deeds are the means of attaining power, as mentioned in this verse. Allah says: attaining power, as mentioned in this verse. Allah says: # *.. .He it is Who strengthened you with His help and with [the support of] the believers. He brought their hearts together...* (an-Anfal 8:62-63) # *O you who believe, when you meet an [enemy] troop, stand firm and remember Allah much, so that you may triumph. And obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not dispute, lest you lose heart and your strength desert you. And be steadfast, for Allah is with those who are steadfast.* (al-Anfal 8:45-46). Here Allah tells us that the unity and steadfastness of the believers, and their avoidance of division, are the means of attaining victory over their enemies. If you study the history of Muslim nations, you will find that the main cause of their decline is drifting away from Islam and division amongst themselves, which encouraged their enemies to attack them and made them turn against one another. # Then Allah says: *You grant honour to whomever You will* by virtue of his obedience to You *and You humiliate whomever You will* because of his disobedience towards You. # *Verily, You have power over all things* and nothing is beyond You; rather all things are under Your control and power. # *You cause the night to encroach upon the day, and the day to encroach upon the night* that is, You cause the one to encroach upon the other, and vice versa, which results in the change of seasons, light, sunshine, shade, stagnation and spreading out. This is one of the greatest signs of Allah’s might, greatness, wisdom and mercy. # *You bring forth the living from the dead*, such as the chicken from the egg, trees and crops from the seeds, the believer from the disbeliever *and You bring forth the dead from the living* such as the egg from the bird, the seed from the tree, the grain from the crop, the disbeliever from the believer. This is the greatest sign of Allah’s might, which demonstrates that all things are subjugated and are controlled, and nothing has any control over anything. The fact that Allah created opposites, and created some things from their opposites, indicates that all things are subjugated to His control. # *and You grant provision to whomever You will without measure* that is, You grant abundant provision to whomever You will, from sources he never thought of and never earned anything from them before.
3|28-30|3:28. Let not the believers take for allies disbelievers instead of believers, for anyone who does that has no connection with Allah at all, except when you need to protect yourselves from them. Allah admonishes you to fear Him, for to Allah is the return [of all], # 3:29. Say: Whether you conceal what is in your hearts or disclose it, Allah knows it all: He knows what is in the heavens and what is on earth. And Allah has power over all things. # 3:30. On the day when every soul will find itself faced with all the good it has done, and all the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between it and its evil. But Allah admonishes you to fear Him. And Allah is Most Compassionate towards His slaves. # Here Allah forbids the believers to take the disbelievers as allies, close friends or supporters, seeking their help'in any matter pertaining to the Muslims, and He issues a stem warning against doing that: *anyone who does that has no connection with Allah at all* that is, he is cut off from Allah and has no share in the religion of Allah, because taking disbelievers as allies and close friends is contradictory to faith. That is because faith enjoins taking Allah and His close friends, the believers, as allies, helping one another to establish the religion of Allah and fighting in jihad against His enemies. Allah says: *The believers, men and women, are allies of one another...* (at-Tawbah 9:71) # So whoever takes the disbelievers as allies instead of the believers, aligning him self with those who want to extinguish the light of Allah and persecute His close friends, has left the party of the believers and joined the party of the disbelievers. Allah says: *...Whoever among you takes them as allies is indeed one of them...* (al-Ma'idah 5:51). This verse indicates that we should keep our distance from the disbelievers, not mix with them, befriend them, incline towards them or trust them; the disbeliever should not be appointed to a position of authority over the Muslims and his help should not be sought in matters pertaining to the public interests of the Muslims. # *except when you need to protect yourselves from them* that is, when you fear for your lives, then it is permissible to do that which will protect you by saying or making a show of that which will bring about protection. # *Allah admonishes you to fear Him* that is, do not expose yourselves to His wrath by committing sins for which He will punish you. # *for to Allah is the return [of all]* that is, all people will return to Him on the Day of Resurrection, when He will examine their deeds, bring them to account for them, and requite them accordingly. So beware of doing abhorrent deeds that will incur punishment; rather do that which will bring reward. Then Allah tells us of the vastness of His knowledge, which encompasses what is in their hearts in particular, and what is in heaven and on earth in general; and of the perfect nature of His power, which indicates that people should strive to purify their hearts and bear in mind the knowledge of Allah at all times, so that the individual will feel too shy before his Lord to let Him see his heart filled with bad thoughts; rather he will focus his thoughts on that which will bring him closer to Allah, such as pondering a verse of the Qur’an or a hadith of the Messenger of Allah, or thinking of and seeking knowledge that may benefit him, or contemplating the creation and bl essings of Allah, or offering sincere advice to the slaves of Allah. It is appropriate, in the context of Allah informing us of His knowledge and power, to speak of what implies the requital for deeds, which will take place on the Day of Resurrection, when people will be requited in full for their deeds. Hence Allah says: *On the day when every soul will find itself faced with all the good it has done* that is, in full and complete, not lacking in the slightest, as Allah says: *So whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it.* (az-Zalzalah 99:7) # The word good (khayr) refers to everything that brings one closer to Allah of righteous deeds both great and small; similarly, the word evil (saw ’) refers to everything that incurs the wrath of Allah of bad deeds both great and small. # *and all the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between it and its evil*, because of its great sorrow and regret. So people should beware of doing evil deeds that will inevitably lead to great regret, and give them up in this world whilst they are still able to do so, before one says: # *...Alas! I neglected my duty towards Allah...* (az-Zumar 39:56) # *On that day, those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger will wish that the earth could be levelled over them...* (an-Nisa ’4:42) # *On that day, the wrongdoer will bite on his hands and say: Would that I had taken a path with the Messenger.* (al-Furqan 25:27) # *Then when [such a one] com es to Us, he will say [to his devil companion]: Would that there was between me and you the distance between east and west. What a wretched companion!* (az-Zukhruf 43:38) # By Allah, giving up every desire and pleasure, even if it is difficult to do so in this world, is easier than suffering all these pains and exposure before people (on the Day of Judgement). But because of wrongdoing and ignorance, a person may focus only on the present moment and not have the rational thinking to see the consequences and thus do that which would benefit him in this world and in the hereafter, and refrain from that which will harm him in both realms. Then Allah reiterates the admonition to fear Him, out of kindness and mercy towards us, lest our hearts become hard with the passage of time. This is a combination between encouragement that leads to hope and righteous deeds and warnings that lead to fear of Allah and giving up sin, as He says: *But Allah admonishes you to fear Him. And Allah is Most Compassionate towards His slaves*. # We ask Him to bless us with consciousness of Him at all times, so that we will not do that which incurs His wrath and punishment.
3|31|3:31. Say: If you love Allah then follow me; Allah will love you and forgive you your sins: For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. # This verse speaks of the obligation to love Allah and explains the signs, consequences and fruits thereof. # *Say: If you love Allah* that is, you claim this lofty status, above which there is no other, but it is not sufficient to make mere claims; rather it is essential to be sincere in that claim. The sign of such sincerity is following His Messenger ﷺ in all matters, in word and deed, in both major and minor issues of religion, inwardly and outwardly; if an individual follows the Messenger, this indicates that he is sincere in his claim to love Allah ﷻ, and Allah will love him, forgive his sins, have mercy on him and guide him in all that he does and does not do. But the one who does not follow the Messenger does not truly love Allah, because loving Allah requires him to follow His Messenger; so long as that is not the case, this indicates that that love is not present and that he is lying in his claim. Even if that love did exist, it would not benefit him without fulfilling the necessary conditions. This verse sets the standard against which all people may be measured; the extent to which they follow the Messenger is indicative of their faith and love for Allah, and any shortcoming in that reflects a shortcoming in loving Allah.
3|32|3:32. Say: Obey Allah and the Messenger: But if they turn away, Allah does not love the disbelievers. # This is a command from Allah to His slaves in very general terms. The command is to obey Him and His Messenger, by means of which one enters faith and embraces belief in the oneness of Allah; all minor issues regarding actions and words, both visible and hidden, are based on that. Indeed, obedience to Him and to His Messenger includes avoiding that which He has prohibited, because avoiding it in obedience to the command of Allah is part of obeying Him. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, it is they who are the successful. # *But if they turn away* that is, if they turn away from obeying Allah and His Messenger, there is no recourse for them except disbelief and obedience to every rebellious devil: *About whom it is decreed that whoever takes him as an ally, he will lead him astray and guide him to the punishment of the raging fire.* (al-Hajj 22:4) # Hence Allah says: *But if they turn away, Allah does not love the disbelievers*; rather He hates them and despises them, and punishes them in the severest manner. It is as if this verse is explaining what it means to follow His Messenger, which is by obeying Allah ﷻ and obeying His Messenger ﷺ. This is following in the true sense.
3|33-37|3:33. Allah chose Adam and Nooh, the family of Ibrahim, and the family of ‘Imran above all of creation. # 3:34. They were descendants one of another. And Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. # 3:35. [Remember] when the wife of ‘Imran said: O my Lord, I dedicate entirely unto You what is in my womb, so accept this from me, for You are the All-Hearing, All-Knowing. 3:36. When she gave birth, she said: O my Lord, I have given birth to a female! - and Allah knew best what she had given birth to - and the male is not like the female. I have named her Maryam, and I seek refuge with You for her and her offspring from the accursed Shaytan. # 3:37. Her Lord graciously accepted her and caused her to grow in a good manner, and entrusted her to the care of Zakariya. Every time Zakariya entered the chamber to see her, he found some provisions with her. He said: O Maryam, where has this come from? She said: From Allah; for Allah grants provision without measure to whomever He will. # Here Allah tells us about those whom He selected among His close friends, beloved and chosen ones. He tells us that he chose Adam above all other created beings; He created him with His own Hand and breathed into him a spirit created by Him; he instructed the angels to prostrate to him and caused him to dwell in His paradise; He gave him knowledge, forbearance and virtue by means of which he superseded all other created beings. Hence Allah favoured his descendants and said: *We have indeed honoured the sons of Adam, given them means of transportation on land and sea, provided them with good things, and have favoured them above many of those whom We have created.* (al-Isra' 17:70) # He chose Nuh (Noah) and made him the first Messenger to the people of earth, when they began to worship idols, and He gave him patience, perseverance and gratitude that enabled him to call the people to Allah at all times. Hence Allah chose him and brought him close to Him, and He caused the people of earth to drown in response to his prayer, but He saved him and those who were with him in the laden ark, and made his progeny the survivors. Thus He caused him to be remembered and praised in all eras. # He chose the family of Ibraheem, who was the close friend of the Most Merciful whom Allah favoured by choosing him to be His close friend. He offered him self to be thrown into the fire, he offered his son to be sacrificed and he offered his wealth to honour his guests. He called people to his Lord, night and day, in private and in public. Allah made him an example to be followed by those who came after him, and He ordained that prophethood and the Book should be among his descendants. All the Prophets who came after him are regarded as being of the family of Ibraheem, because they were his descendants. Allah singled them out for all kinds of noble traits by virtue of which they were the best of creation. Among them was the leader of the children of Adam, our Prophet Muhammad ﷺ. Allah combined in him all the perfect qualities that were scattered among others, and he superseded the first and the last; he is the leader of the Messengers, the chosen one from among the children of Ibraheem. # Allah chose the family of ‘Imran, who was either the father of Maryam bint ‘Imran, or the father of Moosa ibn ‘Imran. These families who were mentioned by Allah are the best of creation, and righteousness and guidance were handed down from one generation to another of their descendants. Hence Allah says: *They were descendants one of another* that is, they were connected by bonds of blood ties and sharing similar sublime characteristics, as Allah said, after mentioning a number of Prophets who were members of those great families: *And [We guided] some of their forefathers, progeny and brothers; We chose them and guided them to a straight path.* (al-An'am 6:87) # *And Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing* - He knows who deserves to be chosen, so He chooses him, and who does not deserve to be chosen, so He forsakes him and lets him get carried away (in misguidance), and causes his doom. This indicates that He chose these people on the basis of what He knew about their characters that made them entitled to receive His generosity and bounty. # The wisdom that we learn from this story about these chosen ones is that we should love them and follow their example, and we should ask Allah to help and guide us as He did for them. We should always strive hard to emulate them and try to acquire their noble characteristics and traits. This is also by virtue of Allah’s kindness towards them, that they are praised among the earlier and later generations, which highlights their high status. How great is His generosity and kindness; how many benefits one may attain from staying close to Him. If they had no honour except the fact that the memory of them and their noble attributes is eternal, that would be sufficient honour. # When Allah mentions the virtues of these noble families, He also tells us what happened to Maryam, the mother of ‘Eesa, and how Allah took care of her as she was growing up. He said: *[Remember] when the wife of ‘Imran* that is the mother of Maryam, *said* when she became pregnant: *O my Lord, I dedicate entirely unto You what is in my womb* that is, I dedicate what is in my womb sincerely for Your sake, to serve You and Your House, *so accept this* that is, this blessed deed *from me, for You are the All-Hearing, All-Knowing*; You hear my prayer and You know my intention. This was when she was still in the uterus and had not yet been born. # *When she gave birth, she said: O my Lord, I have given birth to a female!* It was as if she was hoping that the infant would be male, because he would be more able to offer greater service. In her words there is a kind of apology to her Lord. But Allah said: *- and Allah knew best what she had given birth to* that is, there was no need for her to tell Him; rather He knew about her before her mother knew what she was *and the male is not like the female. I have named her Maryam*. This indicates that the male is preferred to the female, and that the child may be named at the time of birth, and that the mother may give the child his or her name, if the father does not object. # *and I seek refuge with You for her and her offspring from the accursed Shaytan*. She prayed for her and her offspring, asking Allah to protect them from the accursed Shaytan. # *Her Lord graciously accepted her* that is, He accepted the vow and protected her and her offspring from Shaytan *and caused her to grow in a good manner* that is, she grew in a good manner physically and in terms of physical well-being and attitude, because Allah made Zakariya available to look after her: *and entrusted her to the care of Zakariya*. This was by Allah’s kindness towards her, so that she would grow up in the best circumstances. So she grew up worshipping her Lord, and she superseded all women and devoted all her time to the worship of her Lord, remaining in her chamber or prayer place. # *Every time Zakariya entered the chamber to see her, he found some provisions with her* that is, without any effort on her part; rather it was provision that Allah granted to her and with which Allah honoured her. Zakariya said to her: *... where has this come from? She said: From Allah* that is, by His grace and kindness. # *for Allah grants provision without measure to whom He will* that is, without any thought or effort on the individual’s part. Allah says: * ...Whoever fears Allah, He will grant him a way out [from difficulty], and will provide for him from where he does not expect...* (at-Talaq 65:2-3) # This verse indicates that miracles and extraordinary events may happen to the close friends of Allah, as has been mentioned in many reports, contrary to denials. When Zakariya saw what Allah had bestowed upon Maryam and what He had honoured her with of delicious provision that came to her without any effort on her part, he began to hope for a child himself.
3|35-38|3:65. O People of the Book! Why do you dispute about Ibraheem, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until after him? Do you not understand? # 3:66. Look at yourselves! You are the ones who disputed about that of which you have [a little] knowledge, but why do you dispute about matters of which you have no knowledge? Allah knows, but you do not know. # 3:67. Ibraheem was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a monotheist, a Muslim, and he was not one of those who ascribe partners to Allah. # 3:68. Verily the closest of people to Ibraheem are those who followed him, and this Prophet and those who believe. And Allah is the Guardian of the believers. # When the Jews claimed that Ibraheem was a Jew, and the Christians claimed that he was a Christian, and they argued about that, Allah refuted their arguments on three counts: # 1 - Their argument about Ibraheem was an argument about a matter of which they had no knowledge, hence it was not possible or allowable for them to argue about something that had nothing to do with them. They used to argue about the rulings mentioned in the Torah and the Gospel, whether they were right or wrong, but in this case they had no right to argue about Ibraheem. # 2- The Jews claimed to be following the Torah and the Christians claimed to be following the Gospel, but the Torah and the Gospel only came down after the time of Ibraheem. So how could they claim that Ibraheem belonged to them, when he had come before them? Does this make any sense? Hence Allah says: *Do you not understand?* that is, if you did understand what you are saying, you would not say that. # 3- Allah declared that His close friend (Ibraheem) had nothing to do with the Jews, the Christians or the polytheists; rather He described him as *a monotheist, a Muslim*, and stated that the people who were closest to him were those who believed in him of his own nation, and this Prophet - namely Muhammad ﷺ - and those who believed with him, because they are the ones who truly followed him, and they are closer to him than any others, and Allah is their Guardian, Helper and Supporter. As for those who cast his religion behind their backs, such as the Jews and Christians and polytheists, they do not belong to Ibraheem and he is not one of them; merely attributing themselves falsely to him is of no benefit to them. These verses include the prohibition on arguing and debating without knowledge; the one who speaks in that case is speaking of something that he cannot prove and it is not permissible for him to argue about it. These verses also offer encouragement to learn history, for it is a way to refute many false arguments and claims that are contrary to history.